302
THE BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL.
[Aug. 11], 1888.
The Geneva Convention of 1864 and the International Red Cross
Association, to which it gave origin, have brought unspeakable
amelioration to the horrors of war.
The extraordinarily extended literature of our profession, which
in every language makes known the researches of medical men
throughout the world, has found expression in Hirsch's great work
on the geographical distribution of disease. The International
Congresses which have brought men together from every clime to
compare their experience have proved how cosmopolitan is our
science, though to us the words of Scripture may be fitly applied,
that we are "ever learning, and yet never able to come to a full
knowledge of the truth." The remarkable subdivision of subjects
which has been necessitated by the expansion of every depart-
ment; the substitution of laboratory for systematic teaching; the
use of statistics for generalising experience, are all striking
features in modern medical education.
Every collateral science has been made subservient to our purposes.  Even the beautiful art of photography, which has been created since the Queen ascended the throne, has been employed, with remarkable advantages, for the record of our labours.  
The General Council of Medical Education has been created to govern and direct our organisation, and its influence is already felt and valued.  But I must make an end.
Gentlemen,—I have thus, in the limited time at my disposal,
and to the best of my power, noted the changes and improve-
ments in surgical theory and practice which have emerged during
the last half century. The task I set myself has proved longer
and more difficult than I anticipated, as the harvest has been ex-
traordinarily abundant. I am conscious of having omitted much
from want of time and knowledge: but I trust I have succeeded
in showing that in every branch of the surgical art there has been
a wondrous advance, and that the profession to which we belong
marches in the very van of the great army, recruited in all climes,
whose aim it is to enlarge human knowledge. Such a retrospect
as I have attempted makes us reverence a profession whose hope
and ambition it has ever been to abate suffering without distinc-
tion of race or creed. We see how an abiding and ever increasing
purpose has run through these long ages, and that while we now
rejoice at being no longer bound by the authority and crude
doctrines which shackled our forefathers, we can yet honour the
traditions of the past, and appreciate the efforts of that great host
of devoted men who have, by their unselfish labours built up the
famous temple of our art.
AN  ADDRESS  
ON
THE SURGERY OF THE BRAIN AND  
SPINAL CORD.
*Delivered at the Annual Meeting of the British Medical  
Association, held in Glasgow, August 9th, 1888.*
By WILLIAM MACEWEN, M.D.,
Surgeon to, and Lecturer on Surgery in, the Royal Infirmary, Glasgow;
Surgeon to the Hospital for Sick Children, Glasgow.
Mr. President and Gentlemen,—Allow me to thank you for
the exceptional honour you have conferred upon me, by inviting
me to address the British Medical Association on my "recent
investigations in Surgery." It would have been more in harmony
with my own feelings to bring before such a meeting the
work of others, abut this the form of invitation explicitly pre-
cludes. From among the various subjects which have engaged my
attention, it would have been difficult for me to single out
one as especially worthy of notice. Fortunately, I was so far re-
lieved from that decision by receiving a very direct hint from one
whose position in the Association demands respect. In obedience
to that expressed wish, I now venture to address you on the Sur-
gery of the Brain and Spinal Cord—a subject which has been of
much interest to me, and which I hope may not prove uninterest-
ing to you. In doing so it is necessary to premise, in the briefest
possible form, the history of the evolution of cerebral surgery.
THE SURGERY OF THE HEAD IN THE PAST.
Lesions of the head have at all times held a prominent place in
the annals of surgery: much has been done by surgeons before our
day to advance the healing art as applied to this particular re-
gion. Their efforts were, however, chiefly directed to the superfi-
cial parts, the skull and its membranes, and were exclusively
confined to the results of injury. Their operations were easily
undertaken for the most part upon the primitive evidence of
direct visual and tactile observation. There is no reference made
by them to cerebral surgery, as it is now known. The brain's
function was at that time little understood, inspite [sic] fear; it was
intimately associated with the seat of life; it was the "mysterious
dome of thought:" it gave lodgment "in its recess to the soul,"
and was surrounded by all the mysticism which a highly specula-
tive philosophy inculcated. Although surgeons did not share the
popular belief that to touch the brain was to induce certain
death, yet they had just grounds for concluding that to
them it was practically inviolable. It was no want of
boldness or lack of manipulative dexterity, in which, indeed,
they greatly excelled, that determined this reluctance in
dealing with brain lesions. Post-mortem examination revealed
the fact that many cerebral lesions could have been easily
reached, had the surgeon only known during life at what particu-
lar part they had been situated. There were two formidable bar-
riers to the advance of surgery in this region: first, the fact that
the majority of intra-cranial operations were attended by inflam-
matory action, which so often proved fatal as to cause surgeons to
shun active interference; and, secondly, the brain was a dark con-
tinent, in which they could descry neither path nor guide but the
best of leading them to a particular diseased area, and, did they attempt
to reach it, it could only be by groping in the dark. Therefore,
they were constrained to confine their efforts to traumatic lesions,
and of these to such as afforded external indications of their pres-
ence, and which called out clear demand for relief. From the days
of Pott to our own, there seemed to be a growing conviction, not
only of the impotence, but the positive harmfulness, of all active
interference in such cases. The hope was rather entertained of
obtaining by waiting a spontaneous arrest of the disease, or of
the injury.
TWO FACTORS NECESSARY FOR THE INTRODUCTION OF
CEREBRAL SURGERY, AND HOW THEY
WERE OBTAINED.

However wishful one might be to extend the sphere of surgery to the brain, it was necessary first to adopt means whereby immunity from the inflammation which so constantly attended brain lesions could be secured, and secondly, to endeavour to gain a better physiological knowledge, in the hope that light might be shed upon the localisation of cerebral lesions.
In the wards of the Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Lister had for-
mulated the theory, and wrought out the practice of the anti-
septic treatment of wounds, and already much had been done to
dissipate the fears of surgeons regarding operations practised on
other parts of the body. Experience gained by me showed, that
not only compound fractures of the skull, but large osseous de-
fects in the cranial vault, accompanied by extensive loss of cere-
bral substance, were quite amenable to treatment, exhibiting no
tendency to inflammatory action, as long as the tissues were pre-
served aseptic. When this held true of the rough and often
septic lesions produced by machinery accidents, how much surer
would well planned and carefully executed operations be? This
conclusion was subsequently amply confirmed by the results of
operations undertaken by me for the relief of injury, in which
the brain had to be exposed, and from which detached portions of
it had to be removed. In such instances no inflammatory pheno-
mena interrupted the even course of healing. A striking feature
of these wounds of, and operations upon, the brain, was the ab-
sence of false herniae cerebri, which had hitherto formed such a
conspicuous complication of brain lesions in man, and which had
so often marred the success of physiological experiments, by ex-
tending the zone of irritation, and by the fatal results which en-
sued. It was manifest that inflammation arising from ex-
posure of, and operations upon, the cerebrum, could be obviated
under aseptic conditions.
Meanwhile many workers had been sedulously endeavouring to
unravel the intricate and complex questions relating to the struc-
ture and functions of the brain. Previously the cerebrum was
supposed to perform its function as a whole, in the same way as
the liver, heart, and kidneys performed theirs, there being no
differentiation of function. Broca, in 1861, from observation on
human pathology, isolated a particular limited area, as the seat
of the faculty of articulate language. This very important in-
Aug. 11, 1888.]
THE BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL.
303
vestigation foreshadowed the localisation of function in other
cortical centres, if the existence of a definite function con-
fined to an isolated area were admitted, then the question arose,
how many other centres with specialised functions might there
be ? Broca’s discovery was thoroughly iconoclastic, it shook the
notion entertained regarding the unity of brain function to its
foundation, it awakened thought, and made men explore anew with
critical eyes, fields which previous investigators were supposed to
have exhausted. Dr. Alexander Robertson, of Glasgow, suggested,
in 1866, that there were separate sets of fibres for the convey-
ance of special motor impulses from the cortex. Hughlings Jack-
son, in 1869, stated that there were many limited areas on the
brain connected with separate and distinctive functions, founding
his opinion not on speculative deductions, but on clinical experi-
ence, and on the direct observation of pathological facts. The
inception of the idea that there was a portion of the brain whose
function was related to motion, was treated with extreme scep-
ticism, and the suggestion was likely to have long remained a
speculative question, had it not been for the advent of another
and more direct mode of examination. This new departure con-
sisted in the performance of experiments upon the lower animals,
by Fritsch and Hitzig, who in 1870 published an account of their
observations. They demonstrated the existence of a series of
circumscribed areas on the surface of certain of the cerebral con-
volutions, the electrical stimulation of which caused, on the oppo-
site side of the body, co-ordinated movement, in distinct groups
of muscles. These were momentous facts, destined to revolution-
ise former ideas of cerebral function. But their full force and
significance were not recognised, in this country at least, until
Ferrier’s observations on the brains of animals, undertaken to put
to an experimental proof the views entertained by Hughlings
Jackson, were published in 1873. Then the mind of the physio-
logical world was fairly awakened. The suggestions of Hughlings
Jackson or of one or two others became crystallised, and their link in
the unity of brain function was established. After the hemiplegic
and homologous paralysis which result from the destruction of the
Abundant proof has been gathered from human pathology, such
as that afforded by the elaborate observations of Charcot and
Pitres, to put beyond cavil the broad fact that there are points in
the human cortex cerebri intimately related to the motor and
sensory functions of certain parts of the body. The apportion-
ment of definite areas and their precise delimitation is still the
subject of investigation.
Many interpretations have been put on these facts; some hold
that the central convolutions are distinctly motor in function:
some that they are sensory; others that they are both motor and
sensory; and still others believe that the excitable regions of
the cortex are but points of departure and not foci of production
of motor reactions. These views, interesting in themselves, can-
not be discussed here; it is enough for our present purpose to
recognise that there are certain regions of the brain in intimate re-
lation with the movement and the sensation of certain parts of the
body, and which, in the presence of either irritative or destructive
lesions, give rise to phenomena which are of the greatest diag-
nostic value.
THE INITIAL HISTORY OF CEREBRAL SURGERY.
This extended physiological knowledge enabled cerebral lesions
to be more accurately localised, while my experience showed that,
by preserving aseptic the parts operated on, surgical interference
with the brain could be robbed of its chief danger.
1. *Case in which the Symptoms of Focal Cerebral Disease led to
Diagnosis of Lesion in Broca's Lobe*: 1876.—While in possession
of this knowledge a case of cerebral abscess presented itself to
me in July, 1876. The general symptoms of this affection were
clearly manifest. A cicatrix on the forehead marked the site of
an injury under which the skull was bare. Had this cicatrix
been taken as a guide to the localisation of the abscess, and an
operation performed there, no abscess would have been found.
But other phenomena were exhibited which enabled its seat to be
definitely recognised. A convulsion, accompanied by loss of con-
sciousness, commenced on the right side, and gradually involved
the whole body. On its cessation absolute hemiplegia of the right
side was present, and remained for two hours, during which the
patient was aphasic. Both these phenomena became much less
marked at the end of this period. From these symptoms the
1 Journal Mental Science, January, 1867; Glasgow Medical Journal, February, 1871. Observations on Aphasia.
abscess was diagnosed to be situated in the immediate vicinity
of Broca’s lobe. It was evident that the whole of the base of
the left third frontal was not involved in a destructive lesion,
otherwise the aphasia would have persisted for a much longer
period, and it was probable that Broca’s area had become in-
volved in the inflammatory zone surrounding the abscess. Trust-
ing to these localising symptoms, it was proposed to open the
abscess aseptically by exposing Broca’s lobe. Unfortunately, the
result of a consultation was decidedly to negative this proposal.
The parents then refused consent, notwithstanding the assump-
tion by myself of the sole responsibility of advising and per-
forming the operation. Thirty-six hours afterwards the con-
vulsions returned and persisted until a fatal issue ensued. After
death the friends acquiesced in the proposal to have the opera-
tion performed just as it would have been had permission to do
so been granted during life. The skull was trephined, the brain
exposed, and an instrument was introduced through the third
frontal convolution for half an inch, when pus flowed through
the incision, proving the accuracy of the diagnosis and giving
poignancy to the regret that the operation had not been per-
mitted during life. The abscess, about the size of a pigeon’s
egg, was situated in the white matter of the basis of the second
and third frontal convolutions.
Summary : This illustration shows the lateral view of a human brain with a shaded region indicating the location of an abscess near Broca's lobe, as diagnosed from exhibited symptoms.

illustration:
Scene Overview :
  • Main subject: Human brain, lateral view, left hemisphere.
  • Shaded area marks the site of an abscess.
  • The abscess is located in the vicinity of Broca's lobe, which is typically associated with speech production.
  • Simple line drawing with a single hatched/shaded region.

Technical Details :
  • No scale bar or magnification indicated.
  • No colour; black-and-white line art.
  • No on-image text or UI elements.

Spatial Relationships :
  • The shaded abscess is situated in the inferior frontal gyrus, consistent with Broca's area.
  • The rest of the brain is outlined without additional markings.

Analysis :
  • The figure visually localises a pathological lesion (abscess) to the region of Broca's lobe, supporting the clinical diagnosis based on symptoms. The illustration emphasizes the anatomical correlation between lesion site and functional deficit.
The blade of the bistoury which had been left in situ after insertion through the trephine opening, was found to have penetrated its outer wall. The congested zone in the periphery of the abscess extended from the anterior horn of the lateral ventricle to the cortex of the base of the second, but especially that of the third left frontal convolution.
Here the precise spot in the brain which the abscess occupied
was accurately determined from the localising phenomena induced
by the focal lesion, which were trusted as indicating its position,
though pointing to a different part of the brain from that which
would have been selected had the seat of injury been accepted as
a guide. The operation showed how easily the pus could have
been evacuated, though the unfortunate refusal to allow it to take
place during life leaves uncertain the ultimate issue, but judging
from my subsequent experience, worse cases have recovered after
operation.
2. Case in which Motor Phenomena were the sole Guides to the Cerebral Lesion: 1879.—In 1879, a case with definitely localising motor symptoms was seen by me, occurring in a boy who had had a fall six days previously, which occasioned some slight bruising about the face and head, accompanied by a shade of mental ob- scuration. At the termination of forty-eight hours he was so well that his parents could with difficulty be dissuaded from allowing him to rise from bed. On the sixth day he had a series of con- vulsions, the twitchings beginning in the left side of the face, gradually involving the left arm and subsequently the left leg, during which consciousness was preserved. Paresis of these parts remained, though sensation was unimpaired. On the following day there was a renewal of the convulsions, the parts being affected in the same order, but the convulsions persisted and finally became general, with loss of consciousness. Those motor phenomena indicated a lesion on the right side of the brain, pro- nounced at the middle and lower portion of the ascending convo- lutions, as the face and arm centres were the first to show evidence of stimulation. The lesion was evidently of an irritative nature, such as might be occasioned by a spiculum of bone driven into the brain by a degree of pressure exercised on its surface. It was clearly not destructive, such as might be occasioned by severe cerebral contusion. Dr. Alex. Robertson was asked to see the case, and agreed with me that the motor symptoms presented a sufficiently clear guide to the localisation of the lesion in the lower part of
304
THE BRITISH MᴇDICAL JOURNAL.
[Aug. 11, 1888.
the fissure of Rolando. It was therefore resolved to expose that
portion of the brain. As a preliminary, the head was shaven,
when a scarcely perceptible irregularity was detected in the
cranial vault near the coronal suture. When the skull was ex-
posed a fissure was discovered running across the coronal suture.
Trephining was performed at a point slightly behind the auriculo-
bregmatic line, and midway between the external auditory
meatus and the vertex. This point happened to correspond to the
posterior extremity of the fissured fracture. There was no blood
between the dura mater and the skull, but the dura had a very
dark colour. This membrane was opened and gave vent to two
ounces of fluid and coagulated blood contained in the subdural
cavity. The operation was conducted aseptically and the patient
made an uninterrupted, typical, afebrile recovery. There was no
recurrence of the fits; paralysis of the left arm soon disappeared,
and he is living now and in perfect health.
Summary : This illustration shows the location of an intracranial subdural effusion of blood, as diagnosed based solely on motor symptoms, within a schematic side view of the human brain.

illustration:
Scene Overview :
  • Main subject is a simplified lateral (side) view of the human brain, depicted in outline with several major sulci and gyri.
  • A shaded oval region is superimposed on the central area of the brain, corresponding to the motor cortex region.
  • The illustration is monochrome, with the effusion area indicated by diagonal hatching.

Technical Details :
  • No scale bar or magnification is present.
  • No additional anatomical labels or text within the brain outline.
  • Caption below reads: "Fig. 2.- Intracranial Subtural Effusion of Blood diagnosed from Motor Symptoms alone."

Spatial Relationships :
  • The shaded effusion area is centrally located, likely corresponding to the precentral gyrus (primary motor cortex).
  • The effusion is shown as a discrete, localized region rather than a diffuse process.

Analysis :
  • The figure visually links the anatomical site of a subdural blood effusion to the region responsible for motor function, supporting the clinical diagnosis based on motor symptoms alone.
  • The illustration emphasizes the importance of lesion localization in neurological diagnosis.
3. Case in which the Symptoms Exhibited pointed to Lesion
in Frontal Lobe : 1879.—In 1879, an idiopathic case came under
observation, in which the totality of the symptoms indicated a
lesion in the left frontal lobe. It occurred in a patient the sub-
ject of a small tumour above the left eyelid, in the orbit from which
a tumour had previously been removed by me from that posi-
tion, and had now recurred. Other symptoms had, however,
meanwhile presented themselves. The left pupil was in a state of
absolute myosis ; there was obscuration of intelligence, slowness of
comprehension, want of mental vigour, and pain in the head.
These pointed to the probability of a lesion in the left frontal lobe,
but were not sufficient to permit a diagnosis to be made. The
cated skilled nurse. Some weeks later a series of convulsions
occurred, the initial stages of which were carefully recorded by
the nurse, without which the key to the brain lesion as indicated
by the convulsions would have been lost, as, when seen by me,
they had become general, and threatened speedy dissolution. The
convulsions were at the outset strictly limited to the right side,
commencing in the face and arm, and confined to these two parts
during the initial attacks. The leg on the same side was affected
during the third seizure, and ultimately the convulsions became
general, with complete loss of consciousness. These phenomena
were construed as indicating extension of the irritation to the
lower and middle portions of the ascending convolutions; and,
when this was considered along with the former evidence, it was
concluded that an irritative lesion existed in the left frontal lobe.
On these grounds it was resolved to trephine midway between the
centre of the ascending convolutions and the anterior aspect of
the cranium. At this point a minute nodule, the size of a barley
grain, was detected on the outside of the skull. A large trephine
was applied, a disc of bone removed, and a tumour of the dura
mater which was exercising pressure on the brain was exposed.
It was half-an-inch in thickness at this point, gradually becoming
much thinner, and spreading all over the anterior two-thirds of
the frontal lobe. The tumour was, after the usual precautions,
carefully dissected out along with the brain membranes, where-
ever they involved in the neoplasm. The patient rapidly re-
covered, was restored to perfect health, and subsequently was
able to gain her own livelihood. She lived for eight years after-
wards, ultimately becoming affected with chronic Bright’s dis-
ease, from which she died. The skull and brain were examined,
and there was no trace of further tumour growth. This case was
published in 1879. A paper by me, illustrating some points in the
localisation of cerebral affections and the diagnosis of brain tumours,
was published in 1881, concludes:—“When the skull cap
be opened, the cerebral coverings incised, and the brain exposed
further, besides operating in traumatic cases, trephining is justifi-
able in idiopathic cases."
Summary : This illustration shows a lateral view of the human brain with a shaded area representing a tumour of the dura mater pressing on the frontal lobe.

illustration:
Scene Overview :
  • Main subject is a simplified, hand-drawn outline of the left hemisphere of the human brain.
  • A large, shaded circular area is depicted on the anterior (leftmost) portion, corresponding to the frontal lobe.
  • The shaded area is labeled as a "Tumour of Dura Mater pressing on Frontal Lobe."
  • The drawing is monochrome, with the tumour area filled in with dense cross-hatching for emphasis.

Technical Details :
  • No scale bar or magnification is present.
  • No staining or imaging modality is indicated; this is a schematic illustration.
  • No additional on-image text or UI elements.

Spatial Relationships :
  • The tumour is located at the upper left of the brain outline, directly over the frontal lobe.
  • The tumour appears to be compressing the underlying brain tissue, as suggested by its placement and the caption.

Analysis :
  • The illustration visually communicates the anatomical relationship between a dura mater tumour and the frontal lobe, emphasizing the potential for mass effect or compression on the brain's frontal region.
4. *Cerebral Abscess in Temporo-sphenoidal Lobe: Involvement of Motor Area*: 1881.—In 1881, a very large cerebral abscess, located in the temporo-sphenoidal lobe, but involving the basis of the third frontal and ascending convolutions, came under notice, but at such a late period of the disease, that before arrangements could be made for the operation, the patient suddenly exhibited all the phenomena of the abscess having burst into the lateral ventricles. Prior to this, aphasia could be discerned through the clouded state of patient's intelligence; there was paralysis of the left third nerve, and of the brachial and facial muscles on the right side. From these the extent and localisation of the disease was determined. Notwithstanding the fact that the patient was *in extremis*, the operation was performed. The membranes were congested, and the abscess was reached on penetrating a quarter of an inch of the cerebral surface. After several ounces of pus had been evacuated, something like a tennis ball was seen floating in a sea of pus, which still remained in the interior of the brain. This proved to be an old encysted abscess, in the periphery of which an acute abscess had developed, which had destroyed the whole of the temporo-sphenoidal lobe. The patient, though greatly relieved, died from exhaustion. It was seen *post mortem* that the whole temporo-sphenoidal lobe had disappeared, and the basis of the second and third frontal, as well as the basis of the two ascending convolutions, were the seat of acute encephalitis.
Summary : This illustration shows a lateral view of the human brain with the temporo-sphenoidal lobe shaded to indicate the location of a destructive lesion associated with motor symptoms.

illustration:
Scene Overview :
  • Main subject is a simplified, hand-drawn lateral view of the left hemisphere of the human brain.
  • The temporo-sphenoidal lobe (temporal lobe) is shaded with diagonal lines to highlight the affected region.
  • The rest of the brain is outlined but not shaded, providing anatomical context.
  • Caption below reads: "Fig. 4. – Destructive Lesion (with motor symptoms) obstructing Temporo-sphenoidal Lobe."

Technical Details :
  • No scale bar or magnification is present.
  • No additional anatomical labels or fine structural details are shown.
  • The illustration is monochrome, using line drawing and hatching for emphasis.

Spatial Relationships :
  • The shaded temporo-sphenoidal lobe is located in the lower lateral portion of the cerebral hemisphere.
  • The lesion is depicted as occupying a substantial portion of this lobe, suggesting a large area of involvement.

Analysis :
  • The figure visually emphasizes the anatomical location of a destructive lesion in the temporo-sphenoidal lobe, which is associated with motor symptoms according to the caption.
  • The illustration is intended to help correlate clinical symptoms with the affected brain region.
5. _Intracranial Effusion of Blood diagnosed from Motor Symptoms alone:_ 1883.—There are three cases which occurred in 1883, to which brief reference may be made, two of them having already been published. In May of that year, a traumatic intracranial effusion of blood was correctly diagnosed from the motor symptoms exhibited, as being located over the base of the ascending convolutions. There were no external marks of injury, and the motor symptoms alone were the guides to the position of the lesion. The patient is now alive, in robust health, and regularly at work.
6. *Syphilitic Tumour in Paracentral Lobule Diagnosed from Motor Symptoms alone*: 1883.—In the following month, a case of brachio-crural monoplegia, without loss of sensation, was relieved by the removal of a syphilitic tumour from the paracentral lobule and a plastic effusion from the centre of the ascending convolutions. Within a week the patient had recovered the power of the lower limb, and within a month was able to walk and perform her household duties. She has continued since in fair health, and can walk long distances, though with a slight hemiplegic gait, a certain amount of structural contraction having occurred prior to the operation.
7. Focal Lesion in Ascending Convolution Recognised by Motor Symptoms alone: 1883.—A few months later, a brachial monoplegia
* Case shown Path. Soc., Glasgow, Jan. 24th, 1884, and published in Glas. Med. Journal.
Aug. 11, 1888.]
*THE BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL.*
305.
was correctly diagnosed, a focal lesion being found in the white
substance of the motor cortex of the middle portion of the ascending
convolution. The lesion was an extravasation of blood into the
brain, around which encephalitis had occurred, inducing irritation
and compression of this area. The relief given was immediate and
complete. The patient has since been in perfect health and regu-
larly at work.
With the relation of these seven cases, all of which occurred
prior to the end of 1883, the initial history of the movement ceases
to be solely personal as regards myself. In December, 1884, Dr.
Bennet and Mr. Godlee, assisted by Dr. Ferrier, had the first case
operated on in London in which a tumour was removed by Mr.
Godlee from the brain.
Summary : This illustration shows the lateral view of a human brain with a shaded region indicating a lesion in the ascending convolutions, as diagnosed from motor symptoms alone.

illustration:
Scene Overview :
  • Main subject is a line drawing of the left lateral surface of the human brain.
  • A distinct shaded area is marked in the central region, corresponding to the ascending convolutions (precentral and postcentral gyri).
  • The shading is used to highlight the location of a lesion.

Technical Details :
  • No scale bar or magnification is present.
  • No colour; the image is in black and white with shading to indicate the lesion.
  • No on-image text or UI elements.

Spatial Relationships :
  • The lesion is centrally located, spanning the region of the ascending convolutions.
  • The shaded area is medial and superior on the lateral brain surface, consistent with the motor cortex.

Analysis :
  • The figure visually localises a brain lesion to the ascending convolutions, supporting a diagnosis based on motor symptoms. The highlighted region corresponds to the primary motor cortex, which is classically associated with motor deficits when lesioned.
Summary : This is a black-and-white anatomical illustration of the lateral surface of a human brain, showing the outlines of the cerebral cortex and highlighting a shaded region near the top center.

illustration:
Scene Overview :
  • Main subject is the left lateral view of a human brain.
  • The illustration is hand-drawn in black and white, with simple line work outlining the gyri and sulci.
  • A shaded area is present near the superior central region, likely indicating a specific anatomical region or lesion.
  • No text labels, scale bars, or annotations are present.

Technical Details :
  • No scale bar or magnification is provided.
  • No colour; shading is used to differentiate the highlighted region.
  • No visible UI elements or digital artefacts.

Spatial Relationships :
  • The shaded region is located near the top center of the brain, possibly corresponding to the precentral gyrus or primary motor cortex.
  • The rest of the brain is outlined with visible sulci and gyri, but not otherwise highlighted.

Analysis :
  • The illustration draws attention to a specific cortical area, suggesting its importance or involvement in a described condition or function.
  • The lack of labels or context limits precise anatomical identification, but the focus is clearly on the shaded region.
Summary : This figure is a line drawing of the lateral view of the human brain, illustrating the location of a syphilitic tumour in the paracentral lobule, with lighter shading indicating effusion on the surface of the upper part of the central convolution. The image is used to demonstrate a focal lesion in the ascending convolutions, diagnosed from motor and sensory symptoms.

illustration:
Scene Overview :
  • Main subject: Lateral outline of the human brain.
  • Perspective: Side (lateral) view, showing major gyri and sulci.
  • Shading: A lighter shaded area is present on the upper part of the central convolution (precentral and postcentral gyri), indicating the site of effusion/tumour.
  • Annotations: No explicit labels on the brain, but the shaded region is referenced in the figure legend.

Technical Details :
  • No scale bar or magnification indicated.
  • Black-and-white line drawing with a single shaded region.
  • No staining or imaging modality; this is a schematic illustration.

Spatial Relationships :
  • The shaded lesion is located in the upper central region of the brain outline, corresponding to the paracentral lobule.
  • The lesion is positioned on the dorsal aspect of the central convolution, as described in the legend.

Analysis :
  • The figure visually localises a syphilitic tumour to the paracentral lobule, specifically on the upper part of the central convolution, supporting the diagnosis of focal motor and sensory symptoms based on lesion location.
  • The lighter shading effectively highlights the area of pathological interest for clinical correlation.
A Few Points Regarding the Present Aspect of Cerebral Surgery.

Reference may now be made to a few points regarding the present aspects of cerebral surgery. First, are the localising motor phenomena reliable guides to the diagnosis of cerebral lesions situated in the motor cortex? My answer is unhesitatingly affirmative. Each case, however, requires to be studied on its own merits, the whole phenomena presented, the unobtrusive as well as the prominent features must be carefully searched for, the degree in which each is present must be accurately measured, and the whole weighed and compared with former experience before drawing a conclusion. The various points upon which reliance is to be placed should be tested wherever possible by instruments of precision, instead of the rough impressions conveyed by the hand being trusted. In testing the power of the muscles in brachial paresis, the dynamometer will impart much more accurate information than that which can be gained through the sense of touch, and occasionally shades of difference may be determined by it, which otherwise would remain undetected. In many cases the evidences of focal lesions are so distinct that a diagnosis is easy; in others they are so intricate that a prolonged and minute investigation is necessary to decipher them; while still in others in which the signs are so perplexing that at best an approxi-
mation only can be arrived at. To lay bare a certain known convolution on a cerebral surface and observe the results of its stimulation, is an easier task than to take what appears to be a tangled skein of nerve phenomena, such as is presented by many lesions of the complex brain of man, and to relegate each to its true source and infer from a study of the whole what particular parts of the brain are affected.
8. Epilepsy (Jacksonian) induced by Focal Facio-Lingual Lesion: Removal of Cyst from Brain: Cured.—In support of the foregoing the following instances are adduced, and a case is first presented in which the symptoms were so definite and precise that the diagnosis was easy, and permitted me to perform the operation on first seeing the patient. He was 22 years of age, and suffered from epileptiform convulsions, each lasting from two to three minutes, and as these occurred on an average every five minutes, he consequently had over 100 in twenty-four hours. The convulsions were limited to the tongue, the right facial muscles, and the platysma on the same side. When they subsided the parts remained paralysed. Consciousness was retained throughout. Eight years previously he had received an injury to the head, after which his right arm became weak, the weakness persisting, though he was quite able to work. It was clear that an irritating focal lesion existed, confined to the base of the ascending convolutions, causing a Jacksonian epilepsy. The only question was, whether the base of the ascending parietal was involved as well as that of the ascending frontal. The contraction of the platysma on the opposite side has been asserted to be
Summary : This illustration shows the lateral view of the human brain with a shaded region indicating a focal lesion in the facio-lingual centre, associated with Jacksonian epilepsy.

illustration:
Scene Overview :
  • Main subject is a simplified line drawing of the left cerebral hemisphere.
  • A single shaded oval region is marked on the lateral surface, corresponding to the facio-lingual centre.
  • The drawing is uncoloured, with the lesion area filled with diagonal lines for emphasis.
  • No additional anatomical labels or features are present.

Technical Details :
  • No scale bar or magnification is provided.
  • The lesion is located in the mid-lateral region, consistent with the precentral gyrus (motor cortex).
  • No staining, imaging modality, or UI elements are present.

Spatial Relationships :
  • The lesion is placed in the upper central portion of the lateral brain surface.
  • The rest of the brain outline is unmarked, providing context for the lesion’s location.

Analysis :
  • The figure visually localises the site of a focal lesion implicated in Jacksonian epilepsy to the facio-lingual centre of the cerebral cortex, supporting the clinical association between this region and specific seizure types.
induced by stimulation of the base of the ascending parietal. Dr.
Whitlocke reminded me, however, that the platysma is often
supplied by a branch of the facial, so that a single lesion in the
base of the ascending frontal would be sufficient to account for
the whole phenomena. The operation was at once undertaken,
when in the lower part of the ascending frontal, a cyst about the
size of a filbert was found situated partly in the cortical and
partly in the white substance of the brain, and was surrounded
by a narrow zone of encephalitis. In manipulating the medullary
substance, in process of removal of the cyst, the patient, while
under chloroform, had a convulsion confined to the same group of
muscles as were affected in his fits prior to the operation. The
convulsion ceased with the removal of the cyst, and he has never
had another. The wound healed firmly under one dressing, the
paralysis of the facial muscle soon disappeared, and he has since
been constantly at work. The power of the right arm has also
been increased. Possibly the cyst might have caused indirectly slight
pressure on, or had set up an inhibitory action of, the middle portion
of the ascending frontal. This case affords important evidence of
the position occupied by the facio-lingual centre in man, and on
the whole corroborates that assigned to it by experiments on the
lower animals. It was also interesting to note when this part of
the brain was exposed and irritated that it gave rise to the same
kind of convulsion.
_9. Protopspasm of the Hallux preceded by Sensory Impressions, and followed by Paralysis._—In another instance, a very definite protopspasm, accompanied by a sensory impression, gave the key to the localisation. It occurred in a girl aged seven, the subject of frequently recurring attacks of severe epileptiform seizures, followed by paralysis of the affected parts. At the onset of these attacks, patient first experienced in the great toe of the right foot a painful sensation of such severity as to cause her to scream out. Shortly after, that toe was firmly extended in tonic spasm, which lasted about five minutes. Sometimes this ended the attack. More frequently it was followed by clonic contractions of the muscles of the right foot, leg, and thigh, where the convulsions often terminated. Occasionally they extended to the muscles
306
THE BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL.
[Aug. 11, 1888.
the trunk, then to those of the right side of the face and right
arm, the contractions ceasing in the order of accession. Rarely
did they involve the opposite side, and when they did, patient
lost consciousness. Though there was motor paralysis in the
affected parts, the cutaneous sensibility remained unimpaired.
From the great number of fits which patient had, following each
other in rapid succession, occurring in parts affected with paralysis,
the result of former attacks, while the cutaneous sensibility
remained unimpaired, and from the limited area affected, it was
concluded that the lesion was cortical. The sensory impression in
the hallucii, followed by tonic and then clonic contractions of the
same parts, extending to the lower limb, pointed to the upper
region of the ascending convolutions as the area of irritation.
From the general condition of the patient and her family history,
the lesion was probably tubercular, and if so, might be multiple.
During operation the upper portion of the ascending convolutions
was exposed, and with the exception of a few tubercular nodules,
the size of barley grains, adhering to the vessels over the upper
part of the ascending frontal, there was nothing visible on the
surface. On careful palpation of the ascending convolutions,
there was found in the upper part of the ascending parietal, a
circumscribed nodule buried in the cerebral substance, which on
exposure by cutting through the grey matter, was seen to be a
tubercular tumour. As the size of a hazel nut, which was
easily shelled out. As an immediate result, there was prolonged
trepidations of an erratic kind, affecting the muscles of the right
side of the body, but especially those of the arm and the leg.
These were continuous for fully a week, thereafter gradually sub-
siding. There have been no fits for over a year, and the girl is
now in excellent health.
Summary : This illustration shows the lateral view of a human brain with a marked lesion site in the upper part of the ascending parietal region, associated with Jacksonian epilepsy and protospasm of the hallux (big toe). The caption notes that the lesion was a tumour that was removed.

illustration:
Scene Overview :
  • Main subject: Lateral schematic drawing of a human brain.
  • A circular area is highlighted/outlined in the upper part of the ascending parietal region (postcentral gyrus).
  • The highlighted area is labelled as the site of a focal lesion.
  • The drawing is simple, with minimal anatomical detail, focusing on the lesion location.

Technical Details :
  • No scale bar or magnification is present.
  • No colour; the illustration is monochrome (black and white).
  • Caption text: “Epilepsy (Jacksonian)—Protospasm of Hallux—Focal Lesion in Upper Part of Ascending Parietal. Tumour removed.”

Spatial Relationships :
  • The lesion is located in the upper part of the postcentral gyrus (parietal lobe), corresponding to the motor/sensory area for the hallux (big toe).
  • The lesion is circled and positioned near the midline of the brain, superiorly.

Analysis :
  • The figure visually links a focal lesion in the upper ascending parietal region to Jacksonian epilepsy with protospasm of the hallux, supporting the somatotopic organisation of the cortex (homunculus).
  • The removal of the tumour is noted, suggesting a clinical intervention.
The marked sensory impression which this lesion produced supports Dr. Gowers's opinion that the parts in the so-called motor area subserve a sensory as well as a motor function. The localisation of the movements of the hallux in the upper part of the ascending frontal has not been borne out by this case (unless the minute barley-grain tubercular nodules attached to the vessels in the pia mater could account for the stimulation), the tumour being found in the upper part of the ascending parietal, but the whole lesion could be included in the ring which Beevor and Horsley place on the upper portion of the ascending convolutions.
*Other Instances.*—A brachial monoparesis, accompanied by
sensory impressions confined to the same parts, has already been
alluded to, in which, though the centre of both ascending convo-
lutions was involved, yet the chief lesion was confined to the
ascending parietal, and implicated both its medullary and cortical
substance.
10. *Brachio-crural Monoplegia: Cyst removed from Brain.*—In another, occurring in a boy of three years, a brachio-crural monoplegia, with late rigidity, was present, the result of a traumatism received eight months previously. In it a large thick-walled subdural cyst, containing clear fluid, was found pressing upon the motor convolutions, and a spiculum of bone, detached from the inner table of the skull, was seen to have penetrated the brain. These were removed, and the bone was placed in proper position. The patient made an uninterrupted recovery. The paralysis, with the contractions of the muscles, passed off to a great extent. He could neither walk nor stand before the operation; now he can run about and use his hand well, though there is still paresis in both.
With these data from my own experience, as well as from cases
reported by Mr. Godlee, Mr. Horsley, and many others, it is clear
that the motor and sensory phenomena form reliable guides to
localisation of lesions in the central convolutions.
The Diagnosis of Cerebral Lesions in Non-motor Regions may
be made from Sensory Phenomena.—The following instance shows
this, and is also an example of the difficulty of finding the exact
clue to the lesion and how easily it may be overlooked.
Summary : This illustration shows the lateral view of a human brain with a specific region in the frontal lobe shaded to indicate a particular anatomical area.

illustration:
Scene Overview :
  • Main subject is a line drawing of the left lateral surface of the human brain.
  • The brain is depicted in profile, with the frontal lobe to the left and the occipital lobe to the right.
  • A distinct, hatched (shaded) region is marked in the superior part of the frontal lobe, just anterior to the central sulcus.

Technical Details :
  • No scale bar, magnification, or staining is present.
  • No on-image text or UI elements.
  • The hatched area is demarcated by a curved boundary, suggesting anatomical specificity.

Spatial Relationships :
  • The shaded region is located in the upper-middle portion of the brain, corresponding to the precentral gyrus (primary motor cortex).
  • The shading does not extend to the temporal or occipital lobes.
  • The shaded area is positioned just in front of the central sulcus.

Analysis :
  • The illustration highlights a specific cortical area, likely the primary motor cortex, on the lateral surface of the brain.
  • The focus is on anatomical localization rather than functional or pathological features.
Fig. 10.—Brachio-crural Monoplegia; Cyst removed from Upper Part of as-
cending Convolution.
1. Psychicai Blindness the Key to a Lesion in the Angular
Gyrus: Removal: Recovery: Mictico-lexyal Aphasza.—A man who
had received an injury about a year previously, suffered from
deep melancholy, strong homicidal impulses, relieved by paroxysms
of pain in the head of indefinite seat. Though the pain was ex-
cruciating he welcomed it, as it temporarily dispelled the almost
irresistible impulse to kill his wife and children or other people.
Prior to receiving this injury he was perfectly free from impulses
of this kind, and had led a happy life with his family. Behind
the angular process of the frontal there was a slight osseous de-
pression, which could not account for his symptoms. There were
no motor phenomena, but on minute inquiry it was discovered
that immediately after the accident, and for about two weeks
subsequently, he had suffered from psychical blindness. Physically
he could see, but what he saw conveyed no impression to his
mind. An object presented itself before him which he could not
make out, but when this object emitted sounds of the human
voice, he at once recognised it to be a man, who was one of his
fellow-workers. By eyesight he could not tell how many fingers
he held up when he placed his own hand before his face, though
by the exercise of his volition in the act, and by other sensa-
tions he was cognisant of the number. He had been in the
habit of reading the New Testament, and when he had so far
recovered from his injury, he wished to resume his reading.
He knew where the book lay near his bed and could put
his hand on it in the dark. One day he stretched out his
hand, took the book, recognising it, through the sense of touch,
by its smooth leather covers, and the deeply indented letters
on its back; he opened it, saw what he considered must be
the letters, and the blocking of them into divisions for the
words, but they were unknown symbols to him, they conveyed
no impression of their meaning, the memory of their signs was
gone, it was a sealed book to him. These phenomena, however,
gave the key to the hidden lesion in his brain. On operation the
angular gyrus was exposed, and it was found that a portion of
the internal table of the skull had been detached from the outer,
and eventually gravis exposure the portion next to the supra-
marginal convolution, while a corner of it had penetrated and
lay imbedded in the anterior portion of the angular gyrus. The
bone was removed from the brain and re-implanted in proper
position, after which he became greatly relieved in his mental
symptoms, which still became manifest whenever he was in a
melancholic excitable. He is now in perfect health, and has
been restored to work for some months.
Such cases of complete mind-blindness are rare, and the definite  
localisation in this case will assist in indicating in man what
Summary : This illustration shows the medial (inner) surface of the human brain, highlighting a specific shaded region within the cerebral cortex.

illustration:
Scene Overview :
  • The main subject is a line drawing of the medial aspect of the human brain, viewed from the side.
  • A single region within the cortex is shaded with horizontal lines, indicating a specific area of interest.
  • The drawing is monochrome, with simple outlines and minimal detail.

Technical Details :
  • No scale bar, magnification, or staining is present.
  • No on-image text, labels, or UI elements are visible.

Spatial Relationships :
  • The shaded region is located in the upper central part of the medial surface, corresponding to the cingulate gyrus or a nearby cortical area.
  • The brain is oriented with the frontal lobe to the left and the occipital lobe to the right.

Analysis :
  • The illustration is intended to localize and emphasize a particular cortical region on the medial brain surface, likely for anatomical or functional reference.
  • The absence of labels suggests the image is meant for identification or teaching purposes, focusing attention on the highlighted area.
Fig. 11.—Psychical Blindness: Lesion in Posterior Part of Supra-marginal Con-
volution in Anterior Part of Angular Gyrus.

function the anterior portion of the angular gyrus and the poste-
rior portion of the supra-marginal convolution subserve.
Aug. 11, 1888.]
THE BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL.
307
Other cases have been related above; one where a combination of
symptoms pointed to a lesion in the frontal lobe, and guided by
these, a tumour was found pressing upon that area of the brain
from which it was successfully removed; in the other, a lesion was
definitely recognised from the localising symptoms, as seated in
the immediate vicinity of Broca's lobe. But even in such areas as
the temporo-sphenoidal lobe, where destructive lesions may exist
without localising symptoms, one may occasionally by a process of
exclusion, definitely localise the lesion as seated in that part.
12. A Lesion Located Definitely as Existing in the Temporo-
    Sphenoidal Lobe.—A patient exhibiting symptoms of cerebral
abscess, had on the left side optic stasis, stable mydriasis, paresis of
all the ocular muscles, with the exception of the external rectus,
without external squint. On the right side paralysis of the facial
muscles, which retained power of emotional expression to a slight de-
gree and the patient power to close the right eyelid by an effort of
will, though it remained partially opened during sleep. He had also
paresis of the right arm, which during the few hours he was under
observation before operation had amounted to distinct paralysis.
The leg remained normal. There was no diminution of cutaneous
sensibility. From these symptoms it was concluded that a single
lesion must be large which could affect at once the third nerve in
its course, and the lower half of the ascending frontal gyrus.
Second, it was clear that it was not a destructive lesion of large
size in the motor area or the crural centre would probably have
been involved, thus causing absolute hemiplegia. The same
observation applies with greater force to the crus cerebri, which
must be excluded, as the effects of pressure would probably have
led to more extensive involvement. Had the pressure even indirectly
affected that area from without inwards it would have implicated
the parts in the reverse order—the leg first, the face last. The
tentorium theirould prevent pressure downwards and forwards on the
pons. Third, the internal capsule could not be the seat of a large
lesion, otherwise hemiplegia with destruction of “Charcot’s cross-
way” would have resulted. Fourth, though the whole trunk of the
third nerve was involved, paresis was alone produced, probably
resulting from a degree of pressure. Fifth, the lesion was gradually
implicating the motor area from below upwards, and was probably
occasioned by pressure and its consequences. The only place
where a lesion could be situated, producing all these pheno-
mena just to that precise degree, was the temporo-sphenoidal
Summary : This illustration shows the lateral view of a human brain with a shaded region indicating a lesion in the temporo-sphenoidal lobe.

illustration:  
Scene Overview : 
  • Main subject is a line drawing of the left lateral surface of a human brain.
  • A distinct shaded area highlights a specific region in the lower middle portion of the brain, corresponding to the temporo-sphenoidal lobe.
  • The illustration is simple, with minimal anatomical detail beyond major sulci and gyri outlines.
Technical Details : 
  • No scale bar, magnification, or staining is present.
  • No on-image UI elements or additional text within the illustration itself.
Spatial Relationships : 
  • The shaded lesion is located in the lower temporal region, extending posteriorly and inferiorly.
  • The highlighted area is clearly demarcated from the rest of the brain outline.
Analysis : 
  • The key visual message is the anatomical localization of a lesion within the temporo-sphenoidal lobe, likely for clinical or educational reference regarding brain lesions and their effects.
lobe. It was cut down upon, and in the medullary substance of the temporo-sphenoidal lobe an abscess, containing three ounces of pus, was found, which was evacuated, when the whole of the above symptoms vanished. Three weeks afterwards, the wound was looked at for the first time and found healed.
_Can the Motor Area be Removed in Large Pieces with Immunity  
from Serious Consequences?_—If this region be of such psychical im-  
portance to movement, and destructive cortical lesions in it are  
followed by secondary degeneration of the motor tracts, then ex-  
cision of these areas will necessarily induce permanent paralysis,  
late rigidity, and ultimate structural contracture. The removal  
of large wedges from the brain, especially in the motor centres,  
will induce serious effects upon the brain as a whole, causing,  
during cicatrisation, a dragging and displacement of the neigh-  
bouring parts, with final anchoring of the cerebrum to the cicatrix.  
In an acute ulcerative process rapidly advancing, such as an ab-  
scess, none can hesitate to evacuate the pus; it is not the living  
brain-substance which is removed, but the peccant matter alone.  
Epilepsy presents quite another aspect. In the presence of a sta-  
tionary cicatrix, or of a slow-growing neoplasm in the motor area,  
occasionally producing fits, few would attempt the removal of such  
a large wedge of the motor region as to induce permanent hemi-  
plegi*a*. Even when the fits are much more numerous and aggra-  
vat*d*, it is serious to contemplate the production of hemiplegia  
**while** attempting the cure of the fits. No doubt these epilepsies,
when long continued, especially in early life, are apt to lead to
great and extensive instability of the motor cortex, so as to warp
the whole cerebral function, and ultimately involve life itself.
Still, how much better is the cure by the removal of a large wedge,
involving the greater part of the motor area? How many people
would submit to have their upper and lower limbs, on the same
side of the body, amputated by disarticulation at their proximal
joints—for this is what the hemiplegia amounts to—in the process
of cure of their fits? Numerous epileptics have been asked the
question by me, but none have expressed their willingness to un-
dergo such a cure. Even had they done so, the circumstances would
require to have been exceptional to have induced one to hazard
the life of the patient for so poor a result. It is true that corre-
sponding wedges have been removed from the brain of monkeys,
and these animals have survived for months thereafter. In men
also they have been removed by others; in one instance reported to
me the patient remained completely hemiplegic until his death some
months after. Nor is the removal of very large tumours and large
wedges of brain free from immediate peril to life. In several instances
operated on elsewhere, death has ensued—one while the tumour was
being removed from the brain, and one immediately after the com-
pletion of the operation.
In cerebral surgery, not only does one require to localise the lesion, and to select suitable cases, but also, after exposing the brain and its lesion, to judge when to advance and when to hold the hand. In a case rightly localised from the motor symptoms, a tumour was exposed in the leg and arm centres, on the left side of the brain; but its dimensions were such as to cause me, after carefully contemplating them, to refrain from removing it, as it would have led to a hemiplegia of a much more pronounced character than was present. Instead, the vessels which supplied it with nutriment and which ran into its substance, from the surface, were all ligatured, in the hope that this would effect a restraining influence on its growth. The patient recovered and is considerably improved. Though the fits are not quite cured, they are not so severe as formerly, and are somewhat altered in character.
_Anchoring of the Brain and some of its Consequences._—When injury has been inflicted on the surface of the cerebrum, followed by plastic effusion and cicatricial formation, the superficial substance is apt to become soldered to the membranes when these remain intact, which in turn may be soldered to the skull, or in the event of their detachment, the brain may become directly adherent to the bone by means of cicatricial adhesion. Thus, the surface of the brain becomes anchored or soldered to its rigid walls. It has no longer the free play within its water bed to expand and contract according to the varying states of the circulation. Each variation produces a dragging of the brain at this spot, and through it the whole hemisphere at least is affected. Any sudden physical effort pulls on the brain, producing a slight shock, a momentary disturbance, just as if the cerebrum had received a blow. Vertigo results. People affected in this way cannot rise up quickly, or perform any sudden movement of the body or head, without experiencing a sensation of giddiness, which sometimes causes them to drop. Consequently, they are often incapacitated from pursuing their usual avocations.
Following upon this, the grey matter of the cortex, immediately
surrounding the cicatrix, by the incessant movement is apt to be-
come unstable and to produce fits. Some cases of traumatic epi-
lepsy are thus caused. Further, if the cortical irritation be con-
tinued, encephalitis is occasionally produced, often appearing in
a chronic form and long remaining so, though susceptible of being
lit up into an acute affection. If the temperature remains high,
active interference is apt to induce an extension of the encephal-
itis. Operation in such cases should be, when possible, postponed.
The disregard of this advice has, to my knowledge in one in-
stance, hastened the fatal issue, encephalitis becoming rapidly
general.
_False Hernia Cerebri._—It is true that, round many neoplasms,
there is a zone of encephalitis, and, should this be extensive and of
the nature of red softening, false hernia cerebri is prone to form.
It was supposed that false hernia cerebri was entirely due to de-
composition, many recent writers averring that it cannot occur un-
less when operations are conducted non-antiseptically, basing their
belief on experimental investigations conducted on brains in a
physiological state. Had they concluded that the formation of
false hernia cerebri, after operations, was principally caused by
decomposition, and always so when it occurred after operations on
a physiological cerebrum, they would have been right. The con-
sistence of false hernia cerebri is identical with red softening of the
308
THE BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL.
[Aug. 11, 1888.
brain, occurring in idiopathic affections in which there had been
~~no~~ operation. In one instance, in which trephining was performed
for the relief of pressure causing total hemiplegia, and where the
symptoms indicated either acute encephalitis or abscess, or both,
the moment the dura mater was opened a large mass of red ence-
phalitis protruded through the membranes, forming a false hernia
cerebri on the surface of the scalp. This encephalitis was not
occasioned by septic matter introduced through a wound, as it
occurred the moment the wound was made. Around neoplasms
red softening sometimes exists, and interference might possibly
occasion an extension of the affection, though, were the operation
conducted with strict antiseptic precautions, the possibility of its
formation would be reduced to a minimum. With this exception,
there has been no false hernia cerebri after any of my operations.
_Re-implantation of Bone to fill the Hiatus in the Skull left by Injury or made by Operation._—Osseous defects in the cranial wall had hitherto remained permanent, the surgeon making no effort to fill the gap. The brain, in the majority of cases, had thus been exposed, the thin membrane forming an insufficient covering, the patient being doomed for the remainder of his life to wear some kind of plate as a protection from injury. Since 1873, the portions removed by me from the skull have been carefully preserved, rendered aseptic, divided into minute fragments, and reimplanted.
grown, and the continuity of the osseous wall has been preserved
throughout. In a case of injury, nearly one-half of the left
anterior portion of the skull was broken into fragments, which
lay in a confused mass, mixed with brain substance, shreds of
membrane, hairs, _debris_ of lime and blood. The portions of bone
were all rendered aseptic, divided into fragments, and replaced,
quite a mosaic work being thereby formed. On the tenth day, a
portion of the damaged scalp having sloughed, exposed four of
the reimplanted pieces, two of which, lying side by side, presented
a striking contrast, one being suffused with the pinkish blush of
life, the other with the pallor of death. With the exception of
two fragments which shed, all the others remained, grew, and
now form a firm osseous wall, affording complete protection. This
case, operated on four years ago, will be shown at the demonstra-
tion in the Royal Infirmary, along with many others, where lesser
defects have been filled. At the same time, a boy whose humerus
has been restored by bone grafting will be presented. He was
operated on ten years ago, and the bone has grown in length and
thickness since.
*The Note Elicited on Percussion of the Skull an Aid to Diagnosis of the Consistence of Intracranial Contents.*—When the skull is intact and the ventricles distended with fluid, such as may arise in consequence of tumour in the cerebellum, ex ercising pressure on the fourth ventricle, the percussion note elicited affords indications of the altered consistence of the intracranial contents. In some instances this note has been found prior to the exhibition of other symptoms indicative of the presence of tumours in the middle lobe of the cerebellum; it, however, became distinct at a later stage. *Post-mortems* have fully borne out the diagnosis. The percussion note, when properly fenced, is, therefore, an aid to the altered consistence of the intracranial contents. It is clear that it will be of most value in early life in the diagnosis of tumours of the cerebellum.
Statistical Résumé.—Of twenty-one cerebral cases (exclusive of
fracture of the skull with brain lesions or other immediate effect of
injury) in which operations have been performed by me, there have
been three deaths and eighteen recoveries. Of those who died, all were
in extremis when operated on. Two were for abscess of the brain, in
one of which the pus had already burst into the lateral ventricles; in
the other, suppurative thrombosis of the lateral sinus had pre-
viously led to pyæmia and septic pneumonia. The third case was
one in which there existed, besides a large subdural cyst over the
one hemisphere, extensive softening at the seat of cerebral contu-
sion on the opposite hemisphere, accompanied by œdema of the
brain. Of the eighteen who recovered, sixteen are still alive in
good health, and most are at work, leaving two who have since
died, one eight years after the operation, from Bright’s disease, she
in the interval being quite well and able to work; the other forty-
seven days after the operation, after the abscess was perfectly
healed, from an acute attack of tubercular enteritis.
OPERATIONS FOR THE RELIEF OF PARAPLEGIA CAUSED BY  
PRESSURE ON THE SPINAL CORD.  
-Six Cases in which the Posterior Arches of the Vertebræ have  
been Removed.—Turning to another portion of the nervous system,
to which only brief allusion can be made, it is found that certain
sensory and motor phenomena, due to lesions within the spinal
canal, are amenable to operations, which are attended by a
measure of success sufficient to offer a prospect of relief to a dis-
tressing, and hitherto regarded, as a hopeless, class of sufferers.
The spinal membranes and the cord itself can be exposed, and
neoplasms and encroachments upon the lumen of the canal may
be removed therefrom without unduly hazarding life. Such inter-
ference is unsparingly condemned by writers on the subject, their
remarks, however, being applied to injuries, as no such operations
have been hitherto contemplated in idiopathic cases. They con-
tend that they are, first, full of danger, being difficult, prolonged, and
attended by profuse hemorrhage; secondly, that the operation
could hardly benefit the patient; and, thirdly, that no one had yet
been able to present a successful case. Each of those points has
now lost its validity.
The first operations of this kind were undertaken by me for the relief of paraplegia due to angular curvature of the spine. In such cases pressure may be exerted on the cord either by connective tissue neoplasms, or by direct displacement of the bodies of the vertebræ, both lessening the lumen of the canal. By lifting the laminae from the affected part, the tumour could be removed, and relief at the same time given to the compressed cord, were the osseous walls in front found to encroach upon the calibre of the canal. This was successfully carried out by me first in 1883. By the making of an incision on the tips of the spinous processes, and severing the tendinous connections, and then shelling the soft parts from the bone with periosteal elevators, the hemorrhage was so trifling as to be for the most part arrested by sponge pressure, and with suitable instruments the operation, though demanding care, was easy to perform.
Case of Paraplegia with Incontinence of Urine and Fæces, due to Connective Tissue Tumour at Seat of Angular Curvature of Spine, completely Cured by Removal of Tumour and Lamina of Vertebræ.—In 1882 a boy, aged 9, came under observation, suffer- ing from complete sensory and motor paraplegia, with incontinence of urine and fæces, which had existed for two years previously, but had been absolute during the last eighteen months. For three years he had had angular curvature of the spine, most marked between the fifth and seventh dorsal vertebræ, for which he had been treated by extension and plaster jackets. When seen by me the curvature had become fixed by ankylosis of the bodies of the vertebræ. Treatment by extension and plaster jackets was, how- ever, tried again, under direct supervision, in the hope of amelio- ration. It proved futile. The limbs were livid and cold, affected with marked spastic rigidity and with wasting of the muscles. The symptoms exhibited pointed to irritation of and pressure on the spinal cord about the level of the sixth dorsal vertebra. The paralysis having existed slightly for two years and markedly for eighteen months, and showing no signs of amelioration under ordinary treatment, this operation was deemed expedient. Dr. Alex. Roberson saw the case and agreed in the hopelessness of any other procedure than operation. On May 9th, 1883, the laminae of the fifth, sixth, and seventh dorsal vertebræ were removed. There was no pulsation in the portion of the cord exposed. Be- tween the theca and the bone there was found a fibrous neoplasm of one-eighth of an inch in thickness, which was firmly attached to the theca and covered about two-thirds of its circumference. This was carefully dissected off. The cord was then able to ex- pand backwards, and its pulsations, which up to this period were absent, began to show themselves, especially opposite the fifth dorsal. Twenty-four hours after the removal of the pressure the limbs had lost their livid colour, were distinctly warmer, the spastic rigidity had greatly lessened, the sense of tickling the soles had returned, and that of touch had improved,. The first return of movement was observed eight days after. Soon he had perfect control over his sphincters. Six months subsequently he was able to go about without support. Five years afterwards he was perfectly well except a mite, a slight foot-drop, and less perfect in the control of the anus. Riding, football, and heavy
_A Second but more Aggravated Case._—In 1884 another case was seen of a somewhat similar kind, though much more aggravated, the symptoms being so far advanced as to indicate organic changes in the cord itself, which rendered operation almost hopeless. It was only on the urgent and touching appeal of the girl herself that the operation was undertaken. A dense connective tissue tumour existed between the bone and the theca, which was so firmly adherent to both that in some places the theca was
Aug. 11, 1888.]
THE BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL.
309
elevated along with the neoplasm. The portion of the cord thus
exposed was shrunken to about half its normal dimensions and
lay like an inanimate rod. After the elevation of a sufficient
number of laminæ to expose a portion of the cord which pulsated,
the pulsations were communicated to this rod, pushing it from
above downwards, but there were no distensible pulsations in the
rod-like part of the cord. From the whole appearances presented
at the operation, it was considered that there was no hope of her
recovering from her paralytic state. However, ten hours after the
operation the limbs had lost their lividity, felt warm to the touch,
and the patient said she experienced a sensation “as if she were
dreaming that her legs were on and hot water was running through
them.” From the fourth day after the relief of pressure she had
continence of urine and fæces, for which alone she declared she
would willingly have undergone the operation. Sensation quickly
returned to the limbs, motion very slowly. Six months after she
could move her limbs freely. Eight months subsequent to the
operation she walked a quarter of a mile, stated she could per-
form many light duties in the house, besides attending to herself.
She has since been very well and able to enjoy life. A third case
was also successful, but two others have not been; one succumbed
a week after the operation, the other some months later to an
attack of general tuberculosis. In both of these the temperature
was high prior to the operation and was subject to exacerbations,
indicating an activity in the tubercular disease at some part
distant from the ankylosed angular curvature. Since this experi-
ence no case has been deemed fit for operation in which the tempera-
ture did not run an even, regular, and continuously afebrile course.

Abscess in the Posterior Mediastinum Evacuated successfully.—
In connection with these cases an abscess in the posterior medi-
astinum which was exercising pressure on the heart and bronchi,
and threatened life, was evacuated with complete success.
*Compression of the Cord from Traumatism.*—Another class of
cases is that of localised compression of the cord, arising from
traumatism. Traumatic lesions are as a rule so gross, and the
destruction so complete, that in such operative treatment can be
of little service. Still, there are cases in which traumatism has
produced localised-pressure, primary or secondary, which can be
relieved.
Paraplegia from Traumatic Dural Lesion, with Exudant Connective
Tissue Tumour and Depressed Arch of Twelfth Dorsal Vertebra.—
From a coal-pit accident a man, 22 years of age, received a severe
injury to the spine, at the level of the lower dorsal vertebrae, which
caused absolute motor paralysis with incontinence. There was
marked hyperaesthesia of the affected parts, which increased in
severity during the first three weeks, so that he could not bear to
have the floor shaken or his limbs touched. Between the third
and fifth week a rapid change took place. At the termination of
that period the muscles of the lower limbs would not respond to
electricity, they had become so shrunken and wasted that the con-
tour of the bones stood prominently out, and notwithstanding the
massage of the limbs, after the cessation of the pain, the flexor
muscles had markedly contracted, causing dropping of the feet
and toes and fixation of the joints. Later the skin over the bony
prominences became red; pressure points and bed-sores formed,
irrespective of the most scrupulous attention; the urine became
ammoniacal, and his temperature ran up. It was evident that a
fatal issue was imminent, unless an attempt to relieve the pressure
on the spine were at once made. In February, 1885, this was
done. The lower dorsal and the first lumbar vertebrae were ex-
posed. The arch of the twelfth dorsal was found fractured and
slightly depressed, and between it and the theca there existed a
connective tissue tumour, measuring nearly a quarter of an inch in
an antero-posterior diameter, and extending from the eleventh dor-
sal to the second lumbar vertebrae. Both above and below the twelfth
dorsal the tumour gradually shaded off to about one half of its
thickness at that point. It was confined to the posterior aspects
of the canal. This tumour was carefully dissected from the theca.
The same night there was a decided improvement in the warmth
of the lower limbs. He began to move his toes on the third day.
A month afterwards the contracted tendons about the ankle and
feet were extensively tenotomised to relieve the structural con-
tractions, after which motor power rapidly increased. He was
able to walk with two sticks, and within a year subsequently he dis-
pensed with them, so he was able to walk freely. The ulcer was
not far advanced.
³ These last two cases were shown at Path. and Clin. Soc., Glasg., Dec. 22, 1885, and published in Glasg. Med. Journal, besides notes of them appearing in the JOURNAL.
Here are, therefore, six cases in which elevation of the posterior
laminae* of the vertebræ has been performed. Four of these have
completely recovered, and two have died, one from extension of tubercular disease, months after the operation, and after the wound had healed, leaving one in which the operation possibly hastened the death of a patient, who was otherwise in a painfully helpless and hopeless condition.
Such operations are now beginning to be practised by others. Mr. Horsley has a few months ago published a successful case, in which a somewhat similar operation had been performed for the removal of a small tumour of the theca, diagnosed by Dr. Gowers.
In conclusion let us remember, that the same phenomena by which we are now able to recognise certain cerebral lesions and locate them in precise areas, were exhibited by patients who came under the eye of our surgical predecessors, some of whom must have had the album of their memory filled with such impressions, yet they saw not their import. They were so hampered by the inculcated physiological dogma of the time, that their true significance never dawned on them. The facts were reflected from their brain as objects from a mirror, and no more. Gentlemen, there are all around us phenomena, each with its hidden truth, obtrusively impressing our senses, and how do we fail to read their riddle?
REVIEWS AND NOTICES.

The Medical Institutions of Glasgow: a Handbook prepared for the Annual Meeting of the British Medical Association held in Glasgow, August, 1888. Compiled and Edited at the request of the Local Committee by James Christie. M.A., M.D., etc. Glasgow: James Maclehose and Sons, Publishers to the University of Glasgow. 1888.
The handbook giving full information about the medical institutions of Glasgow forms a handsome octavo volume of nearly two hundred pages. Dr. Christie has been assisted in his editorial duties by Dr. C. Fred. Pollock, and has had the co-operation of a number of contributors who are each entitled to speak with special authority on the subject with which they deal.
The first article on "The University of Glasgow" has been
written by Dr. William Snodgrass, Muirhead Demonstrator of
Physiology in the University; it is illustrated by a lithograph
drawing of the front of the fine new building, designed by Sir
Gilbert Scott, which, though it has been in occupation since 1870,
has only recently been completed. The article on the Faculty of
Physicians and Surgeons is from the pen of Mr. Alexander
Duncan, B.A., the Secretary of the Faculty, and contains a short
sketch of the history of that corporation since its foundation by
King James VI in 1509. Dr. C. Fred Pollock gives an interesting
account of Anderson's College Medical School, where David
Livingstone obtained the medical training which he subsequently
found so useful in the wilds of Africa. The articles on the
Royal Infirmary and its School of Medicine are by Dr. M. Thomas,
the medical superintendent, who acted as the medical adviser of
Mr. James Thomson, the architect of the new buildings of the
school. Dr. A. W. Russell, the medical superintendent, has written
an account, illustrated by drawings and plans, of the new
Western Infirmary, which was opened just seven years ago; the
building may be said to stand in the grounds of the University.
Dr. James B. Russell, medical officer of health for Glasgow, con-
tributes an interesting description of the City of Glasgow Fever
and Small-pox Hospitals; this article is illustrated by a block
plan of the fever and small-pox hospitals, with "elevations and
sections of a pavilion specially prepared by the Master of Works,
and photolithographed at the cost of the local authority."
Dr. Yellowlees has written an account of the Glasgow Royal
Asylum, which is illustrated by a drawing of the fine façade of
that large building. Articles on the other General Hospitals, on
the Special Hospitals, on the Lunatic Asylums, on the Dis-
pensaries, on the Convalescent Homes and Homes for Incurables,
on the Institutions for the Blind and the Deaf and Dumb, on
Institutions for the Training of Nurses, on the Medical Societies,
on the Sanitary and Cleansing Departments of the City, and on
the Ambulance Association, have also been written by competent
hands.
The volume concludes with short notices of the Glasgow Medical