486
CUMSTON : HENRY DE MONDEVILLE.
vocations, the science and art of medicine. *Excelsior!* When a regiment advances a company must take the lead. You hold in your hand a glass containing a solution of a given salt of a certain concentration. Your desire is that the salt shall evolve from the chaos of solution to the accurately, efficiently, organised form of crystalisation. You drop into the glass a single crystal of the given chemical and in due time chaos gives way to order. solution yields to crystalisation, disunion and disorder give place to union. The medical profession of America is without unity, or such organisation as becomes the free profession of a free and united people. What could be more appropriate, more inspiring, more eminently distinguishing, than the example of the Empire State, the state of the metropolis of all the Americas, the state of Alexander Hamilton, of Chancellor Kent, of John Jay, the state of enormous wealth, the state of marvelous achievements, of vast and bewildering possibilities, giving to the profession of America, an example of medical unity under the law!
433 Franklin Street.
Henry de Mondeville, the Man and his Writings.
With Translation of Several Chapters of his Works.

By CHARLES GREENE CUMSTON, M. D., Boston, Mass.
DURING the first half of the middle ages, both medicine  
and surgery had fallen to a very low level in France, and  
during this period there is not a single name of any surgeon of  
note that has been handed down to us. But the traditions of  
antiquity had been preserved in Italy, where, during the 12th and  
13th centuries flourished a number of celebrated schools.
Obliged to leave his country on account of the triumph of a
rival political faction, Lanfranc, of Milan, established himself at
first in Lyons, where he practised for a certain time, and after-
ward went to Paris, where his practice and his lectures made
him celebrated. He had for a disciple the famous Pitard,
surgeon of the King St. Louis, who in his turn was first master
and the friend of de Mondeville.
Thus, the traditions of the Italian schools became perpetuated  
in France by men of genius, and also it must be remembered  
that de Mondeville went to Bologna, where he studied under the  
celebrated surgeon Theodoric, Bishop of Cervia, the new
CUMSTON: HENRY DE MONDEVILLE.
487
methods of dressings which the famous Italian surgeon had been
promulgating.
The work of de Mondeville may be considered as a true and
complete treatise of general surgical pathology, filled with inter-
esting detail for those desirous of studying the progress and the
development of surgery during the middle ages. It is, how-
ever, far from my intention to weary the reader with a complete
résumé of such a vast work, and I am only desirous of here
giving those parts having the most importance for the history
of surgery, those where at a glance it will be seen in what way
the present is united to the past and how the most magnificent
discoveries often in reality have their origin in former times.
The chapter which de Mondeville has written on questions  
relating to the profession is of particular interest, because it  
comprises teachings which were totally unknown up to the time  
of his writing. At the epoch when de Mondeville flourished,  
there existed several types of surgeons. In the first place, there  
were the physician-surgeon clerks, which were created by the  
Schools of Medicine, and among this number may be mentioned  
William de Salicet, Lanfranc, de Mondeville, and Guy de
Chauliac.  On this point the old documents are absolutely positive.

Then there was the corporation of laity surgeons, founded after the model of those of other trades, having its masters and its "prudhommes," absolutely independent of the faculty of medicine.  The master "chirurgiens jures" on the convocation and presidence of the first surgeon to the King, conferred a license to practise after the candidate had been examined.  And, lastly, there were the barbers who practised blood-letting and other small operations which were turned over to them by surgeons belonging to the second class, and who had become physicians.  At the commencement of the 16th century they formed the corporation of barber surgeons, which in the 17th century became transformed into the college of "chirurgiens jures."
In de Mondeville’s time the physician-surgeons were the
only ones possessing an adequate instruction, and for this reason
he strongly advises those who wished to practise surgery to first
study medicine. If, as it occasionally happened, the practi-
tioners belonging to the second class above mentioned were in
possession of a certain skill in operating, their absolute want of
rudimentary education and general instruction prevented them
from rising above a certain social level. This was much
488
CUMSTON : HENRY DE MONDEVILLE.
regretted by de Mondeville, and he directed many attacks and
sarcasms, accompanied by anecdotes, confirming his very unflat-
tering statements regarding this class of practitioners. And for
all this he certainly loved his profession passionately, and placed
surgery above all other branches.
De Mondeville says that just as God ordains that surgeons
should be honored like other men, so it shows from the acts and
the chronicles that the Roman emperors, and the sovereigns
who succeeded them, held surgeons in great honor and exempted
them from taxation and common servitudes. In these bygone
times the surgeons of the palace of the prince were called
aliorum examinatorcs or archiatres.
De Mondeville says that the surgeon desirous of learning his
profession should study, listen, discuss, read, and operate, that
he should have a subtle intelligence, an excellent natural genius,
and strong and agile hands. Since he gives himself up to a very
hard and hazardous work, his salary should be greater than
other artisans. Unfortunately, in these bygone days bad debts
were far greater in number than good ones, just as it exists at
the present time, and our author says in this respect that he has
not as yet found a man rich enough, or rather sufficiently honest,
no matter what his condition might be, to pay what he had
promised without being pressed or forced to do so, from which
arises the necessity of making arrangements and all kinds of
concessions most disagreeable for the surgeon, who as long as
he is not paid cannot stop demanding his reward, and should
accept neither promise nor guarantee from the patient, but
simply a bond or the money.
From these and other remarks that he makes we should not  
be led to believe that de Mondeville was avaricious or interested.  
He is of the opinion that a fee or a fixed sum should not be  
accepted from a friend, but in place of these he accepted victuals  
and jewelry, cloths, and cups as a sign of old friendship and not  
as a salary.
As to the poor, the true poor, because already at this epoch
rich people came to consult the surgeon arrayed in old clothes
in order to pay a smaller fee, de Mondeville never desired a
retribution, he operated conscientiously for charity. But he is
of the opinion that our art should not be lowered by demanding
ridiculously small fees, and he believes that it is better to ask
nothing than to allow one's self to be guided by the wish of the
client.
CUMSTON : HENRY DE MONDEVILLE.
489
In those days the practice of operating was particularly  
ungrateful, and even dangerous, not alone for the patient. The  
surgeon was legally responsible for the results he obtained, and  
in order to cover himself he obliged the patient to give his word  
that he would in no way do him harm in case the operation was  
unsuccessful, or else he would obtain the assent of people of rank  
who possessed authority in the city where he practised.
It was, however, in some cases exposing one's self to death
in case of an unsuccessful result, and it is well known how King
John, of Bohemia, had a French physician sewed up in a sack
and thrown into the Oder because he could not restore his sight
to him. And, lastly, at the time when de Mondeville practised
everybody undertook the healing art, and this is why he says
that ignorant and deceitful persons make fortunes and acquire
brilliant reputations, while men of knowledge and who are frank
and ripe in experience, miserably live. But it is more than
astonishing, it is absurd, not only that these quacks and empirics,
but kings, princes, dukes, prelates, and other authorities of the
Church, nobles and bourgeois, mix themselves up in the science
of dangerous surgical cures, and more especially in the treat-
ment of diseases of the eye, which is very difficult and deceiving,
to such a point that it is rarely that one finds a surgeon who is
really an expert in these matters.
During the last few years the history of military surgery in
the middle ages has interested the curiosity of medical histor-
ians, and has been the source of many researches in this direc-
tion, but unfortunately the documents left us are few in number
and Guy de Chauliac, who gives a résumé of the writings of most
of his predecessors, was never present at a single battle. The
appearance of de Mondeville’s book has thrown much new light
on this very interesting subject, because as he says himself he
was for a long time attached as surgeon to the person of the
king, and to Count Charles de Valois in their expeditions against
the English and the Flamands, and was thus able to write a very
curious chapter on the extraction of missiles founded on his own
experience, and which may be considered as a manual of mili-
tary surgery of the time in which he lived. Darts, arrows,
javelins, lances, and many other weapons were in use in those
days, and the wounds produced by them were extremely varied,
likewise the operative indications in different cases.
Towards the end of the 13th and at the commencement of  
the 14th centuries, the cavaliers wore thick armor covering them
49º
CUMSTON :  HENRY, DE MONDEVILLE.
from their head to their feet, which protected them quite
efficiently against blows from swords and many other arms, but
the armor was inefficient against sharp arrows which were fired
with considerable precision by the archers.  The armor was not
proof against lances, and the wounds produced by them were
very numerous and varied in nature according to whether the
point did or did not adhere to the armor which it had pierced
through, and likewise that part of the body which it entered.
The surgeon with the aid of a blacksmith was first obliged to remove the armor and employed very ingenious instruments for the extraction of these foreign bodies, usually in the form of pincers. Here is the operative technique as described by de Mondeville. The member which had been wounded by the arrow was tightly bound to a strong bit of timber and then the cord of a strong bow was put on the stretch as if to fire an arrow. The projecting end of the foreign body to be withdrawn was solidly fixed to the cord, which was then released, and de Mondeville says that he has seen this method fail but once. He also relates the case of a wounded man in whom an arrow had completely traversed the lower end of the femur at the level of the condyles. The foreign body could only be removed by hitting one of its extremities with an iron hammer after the limb had been firmly held on a column of wood, which had been hewn out so as to leave a space under the point where the instrument was driven out.
Usually speaking, the foreign bodies were removed by the
opening through which they entered, but when they penetrated
through the entire limb, or very deeply into it, they were with-
drawn at the opposite side from which they entered after an
incision had been made over them. The arrows used by the
English were small and barbed, which rendered their extraction
extremely difficult.
As I have already said, the work of de Mondeville contains
many personal ideas and original thought on numerous points that
he preached, and opinions are even found which would seem to
belong to writers who had lived at a much later date. Thus the
famous saying of Ambroise Pare, "Je le pansai, Dieu le guerit,"
is to be found almost textually when speaking of the extraction
of foreign bodies plunged in the various viscera, which may
be ;followed by immediate death, and also where abstaining
from their removal will occasionally bring about unexpected
cures.
CUMSTON: HENRY DE MONDEVILLE.
49 i
But it is certainly by his method of dressing wounds that de
Mondeville is deserving of a special place in the history of surgical
science, because he may be considered as the true precursor
of the modern antiseptic methods. Contrary to the doctrines
taught in the schools of medicine, de Mondeville far from con-
sidering suppuration as a necessity, or a salutary vent, believes
on the contrary that it is a very dangerous complication and
one to be avoided at any cost. The method of dressing wounds
that he advises, and which his former master, Theodoric, had
inspired in him, may be summed up in the six following propo-
sitions: (1) sounds should not be inserted into wounds; (2) bones
which compress or wound the surrounding structures must be
removed and with violence if necessary, and likewise all foreign
bodies which are found between the borders of the wound; (3)
the borders of the wound should be united as far as possible; (4)
the use of sutures is indicated for this purpose; (5) the wound
should be fomented with hot wine and dried with sponges; (6)
a plaster of his own invention should then be applied, spread out
on a piece of cloth and covered with ordinary compresses wrung
out in hot wine over which a bandage is applied. De Mondeville also advises the use of linen compresses in the dressing of
wounds, which should not be renewed too often. We have here
the practice of antiseptics of the first order, and also the occlu-
sion of wounds as done at the present time. Abstain from pass-
ing sounds into the wounds, to wash them with hot wine, and
then endeavor to obtain immediate union by sutures, and
dressed so as to avoid the contact of the air, is certainly most
extraordinary when we realise that these precepts were taught
in 1306.
Unfortunately, these wise counsels were quickly forgotten,
and fifty years later Guy de Chauliac, who held the scepter of
surgery in the Occident, brought back the use of the old methods
and the useful part played by the suppuration of wounds was
again proclaimed. Shortly after de Chauliac, a very bold and
practically unknown Italian surgeon, by name Petri de
Largelata, gave distinct rules for the use of the drainage of
wounds which he obtained by using the quills of the goose, and
which was a sure proof of the fear inspired in him by the pres-
ence of pus in the tissues.
Nevertheless the use of antiseptic materials, which far ante-
dated the writings of de Mondeville, still remained in practice
and it is quite sufficient to read the works published at this
$49^2$
CUMSTON : HENRY DE MONDEVILLE.
epoch in order to convince one's self of many substances used  
for dressing wounds.
Although abandoning the precepts given by Theodoric, a certain amount of surgical antisepsis was practised without the knowledge of those who used it, and up to the time of the great wars of the Revolution, and of the Empire, when the simple dressing was advocated, that is to say, an infectious dressing of the highest quality, the use of balsams and aromatics were had recourse to for the greater number of wounds and operations. At the commencement of the 19th century the precepts of the school of Broussais enriched still more those of the surgeons of the "grande armee" and of the Faculty of Medicine. The dressings with serate and charpie reigned without contest, and since this time and up to our days purulent infection and septicemia have raged.
The surgeons of the middle ages attached very great
importance to the virtues of compound wines, tinctures, balsams
and plasters, in the dressing of wounds, and consequently all
their treatises on surgery contain what was then termed an anti-
dotarian, which was simply a manual of materia medica destined
to indicate the composition and preparation of these substances.
The one contained in de Mondeville’s works is particularly
interesting concerning the history of drugs and plants of this
epoch, and on account of its great exactitude and the detail I
will further on in this article give a literal translation of two
chapters from it.
The surgeons of the middle ages also gave potions which
they considered very useful for the cicatrisation of operative or
other wounds, and their formulæ were usually very compli-
cated. De Mondeville was one of the first to doubt their efficacy
and advised against their use.
Embalming entered into the attributes of the surgeon and  
appears to have been a means of considerable emolument  
for them. De Mondeville enters into very curious details con-  
cerning this subject, which aptly demonstrates to what a degree  
the endeavor was made at this time to preserve bodies. The  
ordinary methods were essentially defective because with few  
exceptions the abdomen was not open and the viscera were not  
disinfected, and it is not at all surprising that bodies thus pre-  
pared were not preserved like the Egyptian mummies, and that  
the tombs of the middle ages now only contain dust and débris  
of bones.
CUMSTON : HENRY DE MONDEVILLE.
493
It is a fact that de Mondeville only enjoyed a relative
celebrity among medical writers in the following centuries, and
it is only by the work of Gui de Chauliac, who was his disciple,
that de Mondeville’s name has been handed down to us.
When printing was invented the writings of the older surgeons were published with a kind of passion, Gui de Chauliac in 1478, Lanfranc in 1490, William de Salicet in 1492, Bernard de Gordon in 1495, etc., most of which were published at Lyons. Alone, Henri de Mondeville remained in the dust of the libraries, and his name from this time was hidden in the most profound obscurity.
What we know of de Mondeville has only been obtained by
what he has said of himself in his writings. His name is even
written in varied manners in the different manuscripts. The
French translation from the Latin, which is to be found in the
National Library at Paris, calls him Mondeville in one para-
graph, while in another it is Esmondeville. The Latin manu-
scripts give it as Mondavilla, or Mundavilla, Esmondavilla or
Esmundavilla, Amondavilla or Amundavilla, Amandavilla,
Mandavilla, Armandavilla, Hermondavilla etc., in which the ter-
mination of villa or ville, which is so frequently met with in the
names of towns in Normandy, would lead to the natural conclu-
sion that the subject of this sketch was a Norman. The greater
part of these localities are to be found in Normandy.
The names most frequently met with in the manuscripts are
Mondavalla, Mondeville, Esmondavilla and Esmondeville, at
the present time called Emondaville. The Dictionnaire geo-
graphique et administratif de la France gives an Emondeville in la
Manche in the arrondissement of Valognes, and a Mondeville in
Calvados, arrondissement of Caen.
Master Henri de Mondeville was in all probability from one  
of these Norman villages, and he often mentions Normandy in  
his writings, either for the purpose of recalling names given to  
certain diseases in the language of this province, or for the pur-  
pose of recalling facts that he had himself seen, as for example,  
the cure of hydrophobia by plunging the patient into the sea.  
In some instances he gives the Norman form to the French  
words that he employs.
The date of birth of de Mondeville is unknown, but he died  
at Paris between 1317 and 1320. After having visited the  
celebrated cities of Italy, de Mondeville came to study medicine  
at Montpellier and surgery at Paris, and he made such progress
494
CUMSTON : HENRY DE MONDEVILLE.
in both these sciences that he soon received the degree of
Master.¹
    He professed in both universities with such success that the
lecture rooms were crowded with students, the nobility and
foreigners from all parts of Europe.
Quesnay says that in order to better introduce himself to the
world, de Mondeville appeared to walk in the footsteps of
Theodoric and Lanfranc, but that his taste was not that of a
simple imitator. Being entirely free from the prejudices which
so often lower the mind from authority, he himself judged of his
masters, or at least he submitted them to a single judge who
could decide their true merit, that is to say, to reason enlightened by experience. Those precepts which had been written
and regarded as laws he brought down to their proper principles;
he looked for the truth or for the confirmation in the diseases
themselves, and not in the works and reputations of writers.
The public, which is not always blind to medicine and surgery,
was carried away, so to speak, by his singular merit, and Mondeville found in this public confidence an unusual reward. After
his death his teachings remained for a long time as a guide to
practice, and Gui de Chauliac, who quotes Mondeville 96 times
in his works, places him among the greatest masters of his art.
Nicaise says that Mondeville appears to him to have an
ardent mind, well nourished by much reading in letters and
philosophy, as well as surgery. His honesty is evident, he
speaks frankly, and no one escapes his criticism, not even the
king.
Mondeville was the surgeon to two kings of France, Philippe
le Bel (1285-1314), and his son Louis le Hutin (1314-1316),
whose body he embalmed. He professed both at Montpellier
and at Paris, and as I have already indicated, his lectures were
given with great éclat. He was in France, with his master,
Jean Pitard, the surgeon to St. Louis and of Philippe le Bel, the
most illustrious representative of surgery at the end of the 13th
and the commencement of the 14th century.
For the time in which he lived de Mondeville was a sage, occupying a high position, the highest that could be attained in surgery at that time.   He was also a distinguished professor and up
1. Note.—Since he professed surgery in the Faculty of Montpellier and later was in Paris as physician to Philippe le Bel, he consequently must have practised both physic and surgery. He must have received the degree of M. D., otherwise he could not have professed in the University of Montpellier, and there is no doubt but that he practised surgery at Paris, since his name appears in the Index Funebreus Chirurgorum Parisiensinum, ab anno 1315 ad annum 1529.
CUMSTON : HENRY DE MONDEVILLE.
495
to the epoch of Gui de Chauliac in 1365, his surgery was the
best compilation, the best manual, and the best regulated of any
that had existed.   It should also be remembered that it was the
first work written by a French surgeon.
De Mondeville's style is not as dry as might be expected in
a didactic work. Although using scholastic Latin, the universal
tongue of the middle ages, he gives from time to time speci-
mens of his caustic humor, especially directed against women in
his quality of a bachelor, and he does not use them lightly. For
example, he reproaches the ladies of Montpellier of lacing their
breasts too tightly, and not enough the rest of their body, and
even in the study of anatomy he finds the opportunity of
maliciously attacking them, an example of which I extract from
his treatise:
Et fuit huic membro hoc nomen veretrum impositum ab hominibus sicut patet per modum loquendi Haly supra tegni tract. De causis cap. 37 dicentis: vidi virum qui habebat veretium, testiculos et vulvam. Sed virga et membrum sunt nomina imposita huic membro a mulieribus per excellentiam sicut patet per modum loquendi earum et causa.
In spite of his professional gravity, he occasionally found a  
time for jesting, as will be seen by these quotations, as well as  
other paragraphs in his writings.  
    Mondeville had a high idea of his profession and placed it  
even above medicine.  His desire was that the surgeon should  
be at the same time a physician.
Surgery in the 14th century was only a manual avocation, and the surgeons were merely at the beck and call of the physi- cians, and it must be admitted that the large proportion of the former were ignorant and illiterate.  Surgeons cultivated in let- ters, as was de Mondeville, were the exception, and although they endeavored to suppress charlatans and other quacks, the people and even the nobility continued to place their confidence in the latter class ot practitioner.  I here give a short extract regarding this matter from the French translation of the Latin of de Mondeville's works, the manuscript of which is preserved in the National Library at Paris:
Toutevoies je me met pas hors du tout en tout ceux qui ne
sont pas letrés (que ceste oeuvre profite) ou non. Je di que il
est aucuns d'iceus, aussi comme ydiotes, simples et ignorans, et
sont merveilleusement orgueilleus et despiteux en cuer, disans
que il ont l'oeuvre de cyrurgie, malgre les clers cyrurgiens, de
lor parens et de leur predecesseurs et de si lonc temps que il
496
CUMSTON : HENRY DE MONDEVILLE.
n’en est memoire et dient que il ont d’oir en oir, aussi comme de  
heritage et de nature; et les croient les lais de ce que il dient,  
aussi conne parchonniers et compaignons de lor folie; et  
ensurquetout es jours d’ore les nobles et les princes les croient  
et par eulz tot le pueple, dont il avient mout de fois griés et  
maladies perilleuses et aucune fois mort; pour la quel chose a  
tieux orgueillous qui ne sont pas letrés et se dient cyururgiens  
nostre devant dite doctrine ne soit de rien aidant ne a leur  
paciens, ne a ceux qui les croient, tout aussi comme Dieu ne  
secourt pas ceux qui l’ont en desdaing.
Or sont autres cyrurgiens, qui ne sont pas letrés qui ne
sont pas rebelles et sont plus familiers et se duellent outre
maniere que il n’ont conneu la science des letrés en l’art de
cyrurgie et recognoissent bien que tel petit de science que il
puent avoir aquis, que il l’ont eue des mires et des cyrurgiens
letrés. A ceus nostre doctrine soit otroiee et soit profitable a
lor salut tant pour eulz comme pour leur paciens en leur
maladies; tout aussi comme Dieu ne deneieroit pas pardon a cil
qui li requerroit humblement.
The state of surgical science was quite as miserable as its
practice, and the Arabs and the Arabists were the principal
sources of instruction. Experience was a thing then unknown
and was replaced by syllogism to the extreme, and where obser-
vation should have come in play all that was done was to quote
other writers. The subtilities of dialectic took the place of
observation and the most unheard of reasonings explained the
natural phenomena.
Surgery had, however, been raised out of this miserable con-
dition in Italy, first by the School of Salerno, and then in the
13th century by that of Bologna.. Such treatises on surgery
from the pen of Brunus Longobardicus (1252), Theodoric de
Lucques, Archbishop of Cervia (1265), Guillaume de Salicet
(1275) and that of Lanfranc, of Milan (1296), all of the School
of Bologna, served de Mondeville as models for his work,
especially that of Theodoric for his treatise on wounds and ulcers
and that of Lanfranc for the remainder.
In point of fact de Mondeville was not an original writer, nor
was he one of these imitators which advance science.   As he him-
self says in his preface he proposes to write his work on surgery in
five treatises, the first of which taken from Avicenna comprised
anatomy for the use of surgeons.   The second treatise takes up
wounds and ulcers after Theodoric; the three other treatises
were borrowed from Lanfranc.
The third treatise comprised all diseases _a capite ad calcem_, excepting fractures and dislocations which were to form a fourth
CUMSTON : HENRY DE MONDEVILLE.
497
treatise. This fourth treatise was never written by de Mondeville because death overtook him before he had even finished the third treatise. But before this he had had time to write the fifth treatise, called the Antidotarium, that is to say, a collection of medicines and remedies such as would be called in later years a surgical pharmacopeia. This division is about the same as that found in the preceding surgeries; among others the one by Lanfranc, and sixty years later Gui de Chauliac adopted no other.
The first two treatises on surgery by de Mondeville were in
the first place published from 1306 to 1312, and they form, so
to speak, the first edition; the first only differs from the later
editions by a few unimportant corrections. This first edition is
represented by three manuscripts, one of which is to be found
at the National Library at Paris.
The second edition comprises all that de Mondeville had written of his surgery—namely, the first treatise is on anatomy, the second on wounds and ulcers, the third on special diseases, while the fifth, the antidotarium, is represented by four manuscripts, all of which are preserved at the National Library at Paris.
As this latter work of de Mondeville's is a very excellent specimen of its kind in those days, I will here give a literal translation of the second and third chapters of this work, which I believe to be the first ever produced in English. The second treats of the "Repercussiva," while the third deals with the "Resolutiva."
Chapter II.

This chapter is divided into three parts: (1) special preliminary remarks to introduce the student to the subject; (2) the medicines; (3) explanations.

(1) Avicenna in his Treatise on the Effects of the Different Medicines (Book 2, Section 1, Chapter IV.) says: The repercutive medicine acts in a directly opposite manner to that of an attracting medicine. It cools and densifies the member to which it is applied from its coldness, blunts its attracting heat, contracts its pores, hardens and densifies in one respect the humors which are flowing to the member so that they are not received into it, in the other respect it hardens and densifies the member itself, so that it prevents the humors from entering into the limb. This, for instance, is the effect of solatrum, and Serapio agrees on this point, saying in his Aggregations, in the fourth sermon: On it
498
CUMSTON : HENRY DE MONDEVILLE.
Division of the Effect of said Remedies, "the repercussiva
must be cold, of a dense or styptic quality, in order that
they may energetically repel." He says also, that besides that
there are several kinds of repercussiva, the cold and moist, the
non-styptic, the cold styptic, the tonifying, the densifying, the
contracting, the expressive, and the opilative. The properties
of the various repercussiva are described by Avicenna and
Serapio, in the chapters referred to. The cold and moist reper-
cussivum is designated in the above extract from the latter men-
tioned author, as "inspissative," in contrast to the "rarefying."
It contracts the ducts and small pores, but not in every direction
as due to these styptic repercussiva. The styptic forms contract
the openings of the veins, they are earthy, dense, cold, and have
an acrid, but not pungent taste; owing to their density they
remain adherent on the outside and cannot penetrate within the
contracted pores, and therefore are excluded from the depth of
the tissues, but contract the structures by means of their cold-
ness and densify and tonify them.
Serapio calls them impulsive, because they propel humors,
which they encounter into the interior of the body. The tonify-
ing remedies have the property of toning up the composition
and condition of the anatomical structures and modify them in
such a manner that the limb will not receive the excessive
affluent matter or injurious substance. Some of them effect this
by the virtue of an inherent property, such as seal earth and
theriac; others, like oil of rose, by virtue of their composition.
The densifying remedies condense the humor which they encoun-
ter by hardening and densifying it. The contractiva contract
the member and render it dense. The expressiva compress the
member and thus expel the humors, just as the wine is pressed
out of the grape by the press. The opilativa block up the pores
and ducts in the member to which they are applied because of
the siccative and coagulating properties they possess.
The attractiva act in a directly opposite manner from that of
the repercussiva, and since this latter class of remedies have not
as yet been treated, I will mention on account of their import-
ance, that they by means of their heat and their subtle qualities
attract the humors from the depth of the tissues to the point of
application of the remedy. This quality proves to be of great
use in ischias, after a purgative has been administered. In the
same manner on account of their qualities the remedies remove
thorns, arrows, etc., thus castoreum, for example, acts.
CUMSTON : HENRY DE MONDEVILLE.
499
From what has here been stated it plainly emanates that all
true repercussiva are cold, and it also emanates at the same time
how and where they act, that is, only in hot materiae, for a cold
materia is never actually in the true meaning of the word
repercussed (driven back), even if it is devoured and destroyed
by those remedies which possess some heat, so that the hot
remedies, because of that similarity are also called in a certain
sense, but only because of a certain misnomer in the expression,
repercussiva, which however does not correspond to facts and to
the actual condition, therefore only the cold remedies are desig-
nated as actual and true repercussiva in contrast to the hot ones.
The cold remedies only act against the circulating hot materiae,
and all flow of the humors from limb to limb.
The hot remedies are indicated when cold materia is circu-
lating.
The cold repercussiva are of two kinds; one kind represents  
the repercussiva in the true and strict meaning of the word, the  
other in a less strict, wider and incorrect sense.
The former force the approaching materia from the outside inwardly and are appropriately prescribed where the amount and quality of the matter create danger rather than any sharp heat produced by the matter, as is the case with bloody materia, which the experienced surgeon will be able to diagnosticate by palpating with the hand, inspecting it with the eye, as well as from the history obtained from the patient. Now these remedies are in part moist and in part dry, but all of them are styptic in nature.
The second kind, those incorrectly termed repercussiva, are
all moist, they never drive back within the tissues any matter
which is being discharged outwardly, they merely cool and
densify this matter which is flowing to the limb and the member
itself, so that after a time no matter is absorbed.  They are only
indicated when the burning and intense heat are of more danger
to the patient than the quantity of the matter present.  Such for
instance is the case when the matter is purely of bile.
(2) Of these two kinds of remedies, the true and the improp-
erly called repercussiva, some are simple while others are com-
pound. The true styptic repercussiva are the following: solatrum,
crassula major et minor, portulao, virga pastoris, psilium, hyos-
cyamus, hedera, acedula, scariola, the water lily, plantago major
et minor domestica et silvestris, the leaves and buds of the unripe
fruit of the oak, pear tree, quince, ash, cherry, plum tree, the grape
5oo
CUMSTON : HENRY DE MONDEVILLE.
vine, the wild rose, the willow, the poplar, the reed, the asp,
rushes and similar things, barley, wheat, oats, lolium, sumach (an
Arabian name for a kind of bark used for tanning), barberries
blueberries, sour grapes, thorn apple, psidia balaustea, roses,
anthera, Armenian clay, cacyimia (a late Latin expression for
cadmia and other impure zinc oxydes), potter’s clay, nerda
ferri, coral, antimony, mandrake, verbena, hepatica, corrigiola,
pepper, umbilicus Veneris, maidenhair, sempeviva, hypocisten-
grass, bean juice, gratia dei, and also all juices, waters, and oils,
as well as the substances themselves and all other extracts that
can be made therefrom.
The simple hot repercussiva, as they are usually called, although incorrectly, are the following: spica nardi, absinth, cabbage leaves, fruits of the cypress, both kinds of hoarhound, fumitory, cimolith, white lead, seal earth, all kinds of putty, clay, acacia, and all juices, water, oils, flours or powders, that may be made from these substances and also to the whole substance itself, either alone or in combination with others.
Repercussiva in a wider sense of the word, not actually the
genuine ones, but such as, with respect to the hot remedies,
must still be designated under this term, are the following:
atriplex, mercurialis, malve, violet, cold water, vinegar, radish,
squash, cucumbers, the seed of the malve, the so-called four
cold seeds, manopilium montanum, both kinds of lavender,
myrrhs, incense, mastiche, alum, salt, sulphur, oil of rose,
squinantum (a kind of perfumed rush), abrotanum, corn flour,
both kinds of aristolochia, all simple bitter medicines which do
not exceed the second degree of heat, again all such remedies
that can be made separately or mixed from the above mentioned
substances, such as oils, waters, juices, powders, flours, and the
substances themselves.
Regarding the manner of forming compound remedies from
the single ones, and as regards the method of their application,
three general rules are here given for the three classes referred to.
(a) The surgeon takes from one or several juices of one, or sev-
eral herbs, or of leaves, or of similar drugs, as above mentioned,
and such as may be suitable for his purpose, and adds them to
three parts of oil of roses or any similar oil, one part vinegar
and one-half part of seal earth or clay, so that a mass having
the consistency of honey is obtained.
*(b)* For all compound materia, such as may be composed of blood or other cold and warm humors, the surgeon should apply
CUMSTON :  HENRY DE MONDEVILLE.
5OI
compound local remedies in accordance to the composition of
the materiæ, taking more of the above mentioned cold moist,
repercussiva, when bile prevails, and in the same manner is he
to proceed with the single materiæ of other types, such as the
sanguinous, the phlegmatic, and others that may predominate in
the composition, and if such materiæ be present in equal parts
he is to prescribe the suitable repercussivum for each materia
present.
(c) Before applying any local remedy, the surgeon should
ascertain whether the materia upon which he proposes to operate
is hot or cold, and if it be hot whether of a sanguinous or bilious
composition, and if it be the former only styptic repercussiva,
either alone or in combination, are to be used continually.
When the surgeon is dealing with a bilious condition he should
apply moist repercussiva which are devoid of styptic properties,
either alone or in combination. If the matter is cold he is to
apply simple or compound hot comforting repercussiva. In each
of the above mentioned cases the above indicated remedies
should be continually applied without confounding those which
should be used in one case and those that are indicated in other
conditions.
He (the surgeon) must never abandon the usual remedy until the desired effect is obtained unless this effect should be delayed beyond measure; then it is quite permissible or even advised to resort to one of several others (drugs) that have the same power and effect, while the condition of the patient remains the same.
The repercussiva which are composed of the above or similar simple drugs, are salves or quasi-salves, numbering twelve in all.
  No. 1.   Unguentum de fensivum commune, which has been
often mentioned in the foregoing pages, is composed as follows:  
Rp. Boli armenici unc. 1, olei ros. drachm 3, aceti drachm ½.
If there is fear of a general affection arising, or that it should
increase in extent, such for example, as in erysipelas, then a half
drachm of seal earth should be added to the above formula.
This unguentum when spread around wounds will prevent the
formation of acute abscess, erysipelas and hermes, and prevents
the spread of general infection and aborts acute tumors wherever
it may be applied.
No. 2 is for the same purpose, and is composed as follows:  
Rp. Succorum solatri; sempervivæ ana lb. ½, boli unc, 1, ol.
ros. unc. 1, aceti unc. ½, are to be mixed together.
$5^{02}$
CUMSTON : HENRY DE MONDEVILLE.
No. 3.   The same uses.  Rp. Sandali albi, spovii acaciæ, ana drachm 2, camphoræ drachm 1, opii drachm ½, mix with the juice of any suitable herb and white violets, and a little vinegar.
    No. 4.   Sandali rubei unc. 1, camphoræ drachms 2, solatri, sempervivæ, ana a handful; rub up and mix with two ounces of oil of roses and one drachm of rose water.  This unguentum checks all flow of the heating materiæ, and also contributes to the protection of the heart against all poisonous matter.
But all the above local remedies and other similar ones, must
be smeared around the site of the affection and not upon it,
until a phlebotomy has been done, or until some other evacua-
tion has been made, except in such cases where the last men-
tioned plaster is to be directly applied to the heart in order to
protect this organ from the poisonous matter.
No. 5. Warm bran with strong vinegar.
    No. 6. An ointment made of white wax and oil of roses, Galen’s cerate, will warm the lower temperature and cools overheated matter. (or regions?), it never harms and usually does much good. If it be dissolved and frequently spread on cold water or snow, it will then repercute the bilious matter most excellently. This ointment is prescribed by Galen (IX. de ingenio, Chap. V.), where he discusses the cure of priapism.
- The following preparations are valuable, especially for pains in the joints.
- No. 7. Starch and camphor in equal parts are pounded together and mixed with rose water, and then applied.
- No. 8. White bread crumbs unc. 1, opii unc. ½, mixed with cow's milk.
- No. 9. Ol. ros. unc. 1, ceræ unc. ½, to be melted and washed in rose water, then add croci drachm 1, opii drachms ½.
- No. 10. Apply lana succida soaked in plain lukewarm vinegar.
- No. 11. Lana succida moistened with vinegar to which has been added a decoction of red roses.
- No. 12. Flour mixed with the juice of solatrum and a little vinegar.
- (3) In this section are given the explanations of which there are five.
(1) Do not be amazed that I have given so many remedies
for a single purpose, for as has been seen the same medicine
does not help in each and every example of the same disease;
besides, all these remedies are not to be found everywhere, and
CUMSTON: HENRY DE MONDEVILLE.
503
if they are to be obtained they cannot be procured in all
seasons, and even if they are found everywhere and in every
season, the poor are unable to purchase the more expensive ones.

(2) If the surgeon repercusses in such matter for a consider-
able length of time, until the region commences to take on a
dark discoloration, he must avoid continuing the use of the
purely cooling remedies, and he should add some resolutiva or
compound local remedies from the juice of solatrum, coriander
and cabbage, mixed with barley, bean or other flour.
(3)  If an abscess be not repercussed, nor commences to take
on a pale blue color, nor is absorbed, but remains the same,
becoming neither larger nor smaller, and if the heat and burn-
ing present in the diseased structures decreases in intensity, then
the surgeon should add resolutiva to the repercussiva, diminish-
ing the latter continually until he does away with them alto-
gether, using only the resolutiva.  And although the latter are
now applied for the continued treatment of the abscess, they
are not to be applied to the abscess itself, but the surgeon is to
spread them around the abscess, more especially at that part
through which the humors are conducted from the body to the
diseased spot.
(4) The most generally accepted opinion is that no abscess
can be repercussed or dissolved, and that it is better if it is drawn
out and made to suppurate in order that nature may by its
means purge the body of the deleterious humors. If, however,
the surgeon endeavors to increase the growth and the suppura-
tion, then some say that he does it for malice. If, on the other
hand, he repercusses the materia in a rational way and prevents
the formation of an abscess, and if after some time the patient
should be ill with some other malady, others, or perchance the
same people, will accuse the surgeon because he drove away the
abscess for personal motives. What is the surgeon to do since
he cannot escape criticism, since there is no middle way to be
found and since for all that he must act nolens volens? One
may say the surgeon should leave the choice to the patient and
then proceed to act. If, however, the patient does not select
and forces the surgeon to choose, then he must do so, and if he
can prevent the formation of pus according to the existing rules,
he is to follow what has been explained in Notabel, Chap. III.,
doctrine I, treatise I, having for title the treatment of head
injuries and of fractures of the skull, that is, in that part having
the following title: "Which is the Better and Most Health
504
MYERS: UTERINE FIBROIDS OR MYOMATA.
Treatment of Wounds, and Similar Injuries, that, Where as far  
as is Possible the Formation of Pus is Prevented, or that where  
it is Fostered?”
(5) Now as opium and other narcotics and stupefactives enter into the composition of certain repercussiva, it should be noted that all of these remedies cool on account of their styptic property, whether given internally or applied externally. If they are given internally, in small quantity and diluted by combining with other remedies, they quiet and narcotise, by blunting the sensibility. But when they are applied in large quantities and undiluted, they have a lethal effect and produce the same symptoms on the member to which they are applied in excess. If given in small amounts they only dull its sensibility, they destroy the composition of the member if given in large quantities and thus actually stop the pain, as it is said that the pain is stopped for good in a dead person, since he no longer feels it. Such remedies are opium, mandrake, solatrum, all kinds of henbane, except the white, and all kinds of poppy except the white one. The action of these remedies is more pronounced if they are dry, and amongst the dry ones the following are the most effective: the bark and root of mandrake, the seed of henbane, and of the white and not of the black kinds of poppy. We must warn our disciples against the strong narcotics, and they must be used in small doses and are to be proscribed if death threatens.
✓ Uterine Fibroids or Myomata.¹

By J. F. MYERS, Sodus, N. Y.
A FIBROID or myoma is defined as a foreign growth or
    tumor composed of connective or muscular tissue.
    Pathologists (Delafield and Pruden) divide myomata into
two general classes in accordance with the physiological divi-
sion of muscles in general: (1) cleiomyomata; (2) rhabdomyo-
mata.   We quote from these authors as follows:
In the first-class we find the characteristic elements to be fusiform smooth fibers with elongated rod-shaped nuclei. These fibers are packed closely together and may interlace, branching in different directions, and are intermingled with more or less vascular fibrillar connective tissue. When this
1.  Read at the 35th annual meeting of the Medical Association of Central New York, held at Syracuse, N. Y., October 21, 1902.